This essay is an efort to build an ironic political myth faithful to
feminism, socialism, and materialism. Perhaps more faithful as
blasphemy is faithful, than as reverent worship and identifcation.
Blasphemy has always seemed to require taking things
very seriously. I know no better stance to adopt from within the
secular-religious, evangelical traditions of United States politics,
including the politics of socialist-feminism. Blasphemy
protects one from the moral majority within, while still insisting
on the need for community. Blasphemy is not apostasy.
Irony is about contradictions that do not resolve into larger
wholes, even dialectically, about the tension of holding incompatible
things together because both or all are necessary and
true. Irony is about humor and serious play. It is also a rhetorical
strategy and a political method, one I would like to see more
honored within socialist-feminism. At the center of my ironic
faith, my blasphemy, is the image of the cyborg.
A cyborg is a cybernetic organism, a hybrid of machine and
organism, a creature of social reality as well as a creature of fction.
Social reality is lived social relations, our most important
political construction, a world-changing fction. The international
women’s movements have constructed “women’s experience,”
as well as uncovered or discovered this crucial collective
object. This experience is a fction and fact of the most
crucial, political kind. Liberation rests on the construction of
the consciousness, the imaginative apprehension, of oppression,
and so of possibility. The cyborg is a matter of fction and
lived experience that changes what counts as women’s experience
in the late twentieth century. This is a struggle over life and
death, but the boundary between science fction and social reality
is an optical illusion.
Contemporary science fction is full of cyborgs—creatures
simultaneously animal and machine, who populate worlds ambiguously
natural and crafed. Modern medicine is also full of
cyborgs, of couplings between organism and machine, each
conceived as coded devices, in an intimacy and with a power
that were not generated in the history of sexuality. Cyborg “sex”
restores some of the lovely replicative baroque of ferns and
 invertebrates (such nice organic prophylactics against heterosexism).
Cyborg replication is uncoupled from organic reproduction.
Modem production seems like a dream of cyborg colonization
work, a dream that makes the nightmare of Taylorism
seem idyllic. And modern war is a cyborg orgy, coded by C3
reality and as an imaginative resource suggesting some very
fruitful couplings. Michel Foucault’s biopolitics is a faccid premonition
of cyborg politics, a very open feld.
By the late twentieth century, our time, a mythic time, we
are all chimeras, theorized and fabricated hybrids of machine
and organism—in short, cyborgs. The cyborg is our ontology; it
gives us our politics. The cyborg is a condensed image of both
imagination and material reality, the two joined centers structuring
any possibility of historical transformation. In the traditions
of “Western” science and politics—the tradition of racist,
male-dominant capitalism; the tradition of progress; the tradition
of the appropriation of nature as resource for the productions
of culture; the tradition of reproduction of the self from
the refections of the other—the relation between organism
and machine has been a border war. The stakes in the border
war have been the territories of production, reproduction, and
imagination. This essay is an argument for pleasure in the confusion
of boundaries and for responsibility in their construction.
It is also an efort to contribute to socialist-feminist culture
and theory in a postmodernist, non-naturalist mode and
in the utopian tradition of imagining a world without gender,
which is perhaps a world without genesis, but maybe also a
world without end. The cyborg incarnation is outside salvation
history. Nor does it mark time on an oedipal calendar, attempting
to heal the terrible cleavages of gender in an oral symbiotic
utopia or post-oedipal apocalypse. As Zoë Sofoulis argues in her
unpublished manuscript on Jacques Lacan, Melanie Klein, and
nuclear culture, “Lacklein,” the most terrible and perhaps the
most promising monsters in cyborg worlds are embodied in
non-oedipal narratives with a diferent logic of repression,
which we need to understand for our survival.1
The cyborg is a creature in a postgender world; it has no truck
with bisexuality, pre-oedipal symbiosis, unalienated labor, or
other seductions to organic wholeness through a fnal appropriation
of all the powers of the parts into a higher unity. In a sense,
the cyborg has no origin story in the Western sense—a “fnal”
irony since the cyborg is also the awful apocalyptic telos of the
“West’s” escalating dominations of abstract individuation, an
ultimate self untied at last from all dependency, a man in space.
An origin story in the “Western,” humanist sense depends on
the myth of original unity, fullness, bliss and terror, represented
by the phallic mother from whom all humans must separate, the
task of individual development and of history, the twin potent
myths inscribed most powerfully for us in psychoanalysis and
Marxism. Hilary Klein has argued that both Marxism and psychoanalysis,
in their concepts of labor and of individuation and
gender formation, depend on the plot of original unity out of
which diference must be produced and enlisted in a drama of
escalating domination of woman/nature.2The cyborg skips the
step of original unity, of identifcation with nature in the Western
sense. This is its illegitimate promise that might lead to subversion
of its teleology as Star Wars.
The cyborg is resolutely committed to partiality, irony, intimacy,
and perversity. It is oppositional, utopian, and completely
without innocence. No longer structured by the polarity
of public and private, the cyborg defnes a technological
 polis based partly on a revolution of social relations in the oikos,
the household. Nature and culture are reworked; the one can
no longer be the resource for appropriation or incorporation by
the other. The relationships for forming wholes from parts,
including those of polarity and hierarchical domination, are
at issue in the cyborg world. Unlike the hopes of Frankenstein’s
monster, the cyborg does not expect its father to save it
through a restoration of the garden—that is, through the fabrication
of a heterosexual mate, through its completion in a fnished
whole, a city and cosmos. The cyborg does not dream of
community on the model of the organic family, this time without
the oedipal project. The cyborg would not recognize the
Garden of Eden; it is not made of mud and cannot dream of returning
to dust. Perhaps that is why I want to see if cyborgs
can subvert the apocalypse of returning to nuclear dust in the
manic compulsion to name the Enemy. Cyborgs are not reverent;
they do not re-member the cosmos. They are wary of hol -
ism, but needy for connection—they seem to have a natural feel
for united-front politics, but without the vanguard party. The
main trouble with cyborgs, of course, is that they are the ille -
gitimate ofspring of militarism and patriarchal capitalism, not
to mention state socialism. But illegitimate ofspring are ofen
 exceedingly unfaithful to their origins. Their fathers, afer all,
are inessential.
I will return to the science fiction of cyborgs at the end of this
essay, but now I want to signal three crucial boundary breakdowns
that make the following political-fctional (political-
 scientifc) analysis possible. By the late twentieth century in
U.S. scientifc culture, the boundary between human and animal
is thoroughly breached. The last beachheads of uniqueness
have been polluted if not turned into amusement parks: language,
tool use, social behavior, mental events—nothing really
convincingly settles the separation of human and animal. And
many people no longer feel the need for such a separation; indeed,
many branches of feminist culture afrm the pleasure of
connection of human and other living creatures. Movements
for animal rights are not irrational denials of human uniqueness;
they are a clear-sighted recognition of connection across
the discredited breach of nature and culture. Biology and evolutionary
theory over the past two centuries have simultaneously
produced modern organisms as objects of knowledge and
reduced the line between humans and animals to a faint trace
re-etched in ideological struggle or professional disputes between
life and social science. Within this framework, teaching
modern Christian creationism should be fought as a form of
child abuse.
Biological-determinist ideology is only one position opened
up in scientifc culture for arguing the meanings of human aniA
mality. There is much room for radical political people to contest
the meanings of the breached boundary.
3 The cyborg appears
in myth precisely where the boundary between human
and animal is transgressed. Far from signaling a walling of of
people from other living beings, cyborgs signal disturbingly and
pleasurably tight coupling. Bestiality has a new status in this
cycle of marriage exchange.
The second leaky distinction is between animal–human
(organism) and machine. Pre-cybernetic machines could be
haunted; there was always the specter of the ghost in the machine.
This dualism structured the dialogue between materialism
and idealism that was settled by a dialectical progeny, called
spirit or history, according to taste. But basically machines were
not self-moving, self-designing, autonomous. They could not
achieve man’s dream, only mock it. They were not man, an author
to himself, but only a caricature of that masculinist reproductive
dream. To think they were otherwise was paranoid.
Now we are not so sure. Late twentieth-century machines have
made thoroughly ambiguous the diference between natural
and artifcial, mind and body, self-developing and externally
designed, and many other distinctions that used to apply to organisms
and machines. Our machines are disturbingly lively,
and we ourselves frighteningly inert.
Technological determination is only one ideological space
opened up by the reconceptions of machine and organism as
coded texts through which we engage in the play of writing and
reading the world.4 “Textualization” of everything in poststructuralist,
postmodernist theory has been damned by Marxists
and socialist-feminists for its utopian disregard for the lived
relations of domination that ground the “play” of arbitrary
reading.5 It is certainly true that postmodernist strategies, like
my cyborg myth, subvert myriad organic wholes (for example,
the poem, the primitive culture, the biological organism). In
short, the certainty of what counts as nature—a source of insight
and promise of innocence—is undermined, probably fatally.
The transcendent authorization of interpretation is lost,
and with it the ontology grounding “Western” epistemology.
But the alternative is not cynicism or faithlessness, that is, some
version of abstract existence, like the accounts of technological
determinism destroying “man” by the “machine” or “meaningful
political action” by the “text.” Who cyborgs will be
ble. Modern machinery is an irreverent upstart god, mocking
the Father’s ubiquity and spirituality. The silicon chip is a surface
for writing; it is etched in molecular scales disturbed only
by atomic noise, the ultimate interference for nuclear scores.
Writing, power, and technology are old partners in Western
stories of the origin of civilization, but miniaturization has
changed our experience of mechanism. Miniaturization has
turned out to be about power; small is not so much beautiful as
preeminently dangerous, as in cruise missiles. Contrast the TV
sets of the 1950s or the news cameras of the 1970s with the TV
wristbands or hand-sized video cameras now advertised. Our
best machines are made of sunshine; they are all light and clean
because they are nothing but signals, electromagnetic waves,
a section of a spectrum, and these machines are eminently
portable, mobile—a matter of immense human pain in Detroit
and Singapore. People are nowhere near so fuid, being both
material and opaque. Cyborgs are ether, quintessence.
The ubiquity and invisibility of cyborgs are precisely why
these Sunshine Belt machines are so deadly. They are as hard to
see politically as materially. They are about consciousness—or
its simulation.7 They are foating signifers moving in pickup
trucks across Europe, blocked more efectively by the witchweavings
of the displaced and so unnatural women of the antinuclear
Greenham Women’s Peace Camp, who read the cyborg
webs of power so very well, than by the militant labor of older
masculinist politics, whose natural constituency needs defense
jobs. Ultimately the “hardest” science is about the realm of
greatest boundary confusion, the realm of pure number, pure
spirit, C3
I, cryptography, and the preservation of potent secrets.
The new machines are so clean and light. Their engineers
are sun-worshippers mediating a new scientifc revolution associated
with the night dream of postindustrial society. The
diseases evoked by these clean machines are “no more” than
the minuscule coding changes of an antigen in the immune
system, “no more” than the experience of stress. The nimble
fngers of “Oriental” women, the old fascination of little Anglo-Saxon
Victorian girls with doll’s houses, women’s enforced
attention to the small take on quite new dimensions in this
world. There might be a cyborg Alice taking account of these
new dimensions. Ironically, it might be the unnatural cyborg
women making chips in Asia and spiral dancing in Santa Rita
Jail8 whose constructed unities will guide efective oppositional
strategies.
So my cyborg myth is about transgressed boundaries, potent
fusions, and dangerous possibilities, which progressive people
might explore as one part of needed political work. One of my
premises is that most American socialists and feminists see
deepened dualisms of mind and body, animal and machine,
idealism and materialism in the social practices, symbolic formulations,
and physical artifacts associated with “high technology”
and scientifc culture. From One-Dimensional Man
(Mar cuse 1964) to The Death of Nature (Merchant 1980), the
analytic resources developed by progressives have insisted on
the necessary domination of technics and recalled us to an