We have said that we have a certain direction
at each point of our surface. Can we in general do this
without exception? In general we cannot. In each point, in
general, we shall have a certain tangent direction defined, but
there will be certain singular points in the correspondence.
The only case in which the correspondence can be complete
is when the surface is of genus one. For instance, there
must be singular points for the genus zero. In that case,
Poincar´e stated that every trajectory is either a closed one,
or finishes in a singular point, or is asymptotic to a closed
curve. For genus one, singular points may be absent, but
the shapes of curves verifying the equation may yet be much
more complicated.
Differential equations of higher order will also of course
(and did indeed in some parts of Poincar´e’s work) require
the intervention of analysis situs. But the difficulty will
be much greater, as in hyper-spaces this theory becomes as
complicated as it was simple in Riemann’s hands when applied
to ordinary surfaces. These higher chapters of analysis situs
begin, however, to be well known, and though they could
not hitherto be applied to differential equations, their rˆole
is already clear, owing to the works of Picard and Poincar´e,
in the natural generalization of Riemann’s original theory. I
mean the difficult theory of algebraic surfaces and algebraic
functions of two or more independent variables.
In the line of partial differential equations, we must point
out a very remarkable analogous example due to Volterra and
concerning the problem of elasticity. Generally speaking, if
the external forces and also the peripheric efforts acting on
a homogeneous solid body are zero, so will be the stress at
every point of its substance. More precisely in such a body of
simply connected shape, stress could only appear under those
conditions if singular points would exist where they would
cease to obey the general laws known for their distribution.
These peculiar distinctions are closely connected with the
fundamental distinctions of analysis situs. They are due to the
fact that there are many ways essentially distinct from each
other, of passing from one point to another of a circumference
(according to the number of revolutions performed around the
curve) whilst any line joining two points of the surface of a
sphere can be changed into any other one by continuous
deformation.
This question of correspondences and Euler’s theorem on
polyhedra would give us the most simple and elementary
instances in which the results are profoundly modified by
considerations of analysis situs, if another one did not exist
which concerns the principles of geometry themselves. I
mean the Klein-Clifford conception of space. But since this
conception has been fully and definitively developed in Klein’s
Evanston Colloquium, there is no use insisting on it. We
want only to remember that this question bears to a high
degree the general character of those which were spoken of
in the present lecture. Klein-Clifford’s space and Euclid’s
ordinary space are not only approximately, but fully and
rigorously identical as long as the figures dealt with do not
exceed certain dimensions. Nothing therefore can distinguish
them from each other in their infinitesimal properties. Yet
they prove quite different if sufficiently great distances are
considered.
This example, as you see, exactly like the previous ones,
teaches us that some fundamental features of mathematical
solutions may remain hidden as long as we confine ourselves
to the details; so that in order to discover them we must
necessarily turn our attention towards the mode of synthesis
of those details which introduce the point of view of analysis
situs