Chadber was the name of the host, florid of countenance, portly of
person, and of manner pompous and urbane. Solely within the walls of the
Chequers lay his world, that inn having been acquired by his
great-grandfather as far back as the year 1667, when the jovial Stuart
King sat on the English throne, and the Hanoverian Electors were not yet
dreamed of.

A Tory was Mr. Chadber to the backbone. None so bitter 'gainst the
little German as he, and surely none had looked forward more eagerly to
the advent of the gallant Charles Edward. If he confined his patriotism
to drinking success to Prince Charlie's campaign, who shall blame him?
And if, when sundry Whig gentlemen halted at the Chequers on their way
to the coast, and, calling for a bottle of Rhenish, bade him toss down a
glass himself with a health to his Majesty, again who shall blame Mr.
Chadber for obeying? What was a health one way or another when you had
rendered active service to two of his Stuart Highness's adherents?

It was Mr. Chadber's boast, uttered only to his admiring Tory
neighbours, that he had, at the risk of his own life, given shelter to
two fugitives of the disastrous 'Forty-five, who had come so far out of
their way as quiet Fallowfield. That no one had set eyes on either of
the men was no reason for doubting an honest landlord's word. But no one
would have thought of doubting any statement that Mr. Chadber might
make. Mine host of the Chequers was a great personage in the town, being
able both to read and to write, and having once, when young, travelled
as far north as London town, staying there for ten days and setting
eyes on no less a person than the great Duke of Marlborough himself when
that gentleman was riding along the Strand on his way to St. James's.

Also, it was a not-to-be-ignored fact that Mr. Chadber's home-brewed ale
was far superior to that sold by the landlord of the rival inn at the
other end of the village.

Altogether he was a most important character, and no one was more aware
of his importance than his worthy self.

To "gentlemen born," whom, he protested, he could distinguish at a
glance, he was almost obsequiously polite, but on clerks and underlings,
and men who bore no signs of affluence about their persons, he wasted
none of his deference.

Thus it was that, when a little green-clad lawyer alighted one day from
the mail coach and entered the coffee-room at the Chequers, he was
received with pomposity and scarce-veiled condescension.

He was nervous, it seemed, and more than a little worried. He offended
Mr. Chadber at the outset, when he insinuated that he was come to meet a
gentleman who might perhaps be rather shabbily clothed, rather short of
purse, and even of rather unsavoury repute. Very severely did Mr.
Chadber give him to understand that guests of that description were
entirely unknown at the Chequers.

There was an air of mystery about the lawyer, and it appeared almost as
though he were striving to probe mine host. Mr. Chadber bridled, a
little, and became aloof and haughty.

When the lawyer dared openly to ask if he had had any dealings with
highwaymen of late, he was properly and thoroughly affronted.

The lawyer became suddenly more at ease. He eyed Mr. Chadber
speculatively, holding a pinch of snuff to one thin nostril.

"Perhaps you have staying here a certain--ah--Sir--Anthony--Ferndale?"
he hazarded.

The gentle air of injury fell from Mr. Chadber. Certainly he had, and
come only yesterday a-purpose to meet his solicitor.

The lawyer nodded.

"I am he. Be so good as to apprise Sir Anthony of my arrival."

Mr. Chadber bowed exceeding low, and implored the lawyer not to remain
in the draughty coffee-room. Sir Anthony would never forgive him an he
allowed his solicitor to await him there. Would he not come to Sir
Anthony's private parlour?

The very faintest of smiles creased the lawyer's thin face as he walked
along the passage in Mr. Chadber's wake.

He was ushered into a low-ceilinged, pleasant chamber looking out on to
the quiet street, and left alone what time Mr. Chadber went in search of
Sir Anthony.

The room was panelled and ceilinged in oak, with blue curtains to the
windows and blue cushions on the high-backed settle by the fire. A table
stood in the centre of the floor, with a white table-cloth thereon and
places laid for two. Another smaller table stood by the fireplace,
together with a chair and a stool.

The lawyer took silent stock of his surroundings, and reflected grimly
on the landlord's sudden change of front. It would appear that Sir
Anthony was a gentleman of some standing at the Chequers.

Yet the little man was plainly unhappy, and fell to pacing to and fro,
his chin sunk low on his breast, and his hands clasped behind his back.
He was come to seek the disgraced son of an Earl, and he was afraid of
what he might find.

Six years ago Lord John Carstares, eldest son of the Earl of Wyncham,
had gone with his brother, the Hon. Richard, to a card party, and had
returned a dishonoured man.

That Jack Carstares should cheat was incredible, ridiculous, and at
first no one had believed the tale that so quickly spread. But he had
confirmed that tale himself, defiantly and without shame, before riding
off, bound, men said, for France and the foreign parts. Brother Richard
was left, so said the countryside, to marry the lady they were both in
love with. Nothing further had been heard of Lord John, and the outraged
Earl forbade his name to be mentioned at Wyncham, swearing to disinherit
the prodigal. Richard espoused the fair Lady Lavinia and brought her to
live at the great house, strangely forlorn now without Lord John's
magnetic presence; but, far from being an elated bridegroom, he seemed
to have brought gloom with him from the honeymoon, so silent and so
unhappy was he.

Six years drifted slowly by without bringing any news of Lord John, and
then, two months ago, journeying from London to Wyncham, Richard's coach
had been waylaid, and by a highwayman who proved to be none other than
the scapegrace peer.

Richard's feelings may be imagined. Lord John had been singularly
unimpressed by anything beyond the humour of the situation. That,
however, had struck him most forcibly, and he had burst out into a fit
of laughter that had brought a lump into Richard's throat, and a fresh
ache into his heart.

Upon pressure John had given his brother the address of the inn, "in
case of accidents," and told him to ask for "Sir Anthony Ferndale" if
ever he should need him. Then with one hearty handshake, he had galloped
off into the darkness....

The lawyer stopped his restless pacing to listen. Down the passage was
coming the tap-tap of high heels on the wooden floor, accompanied by a
slight rustle as of stiff silks.

The little man tugged suddenly at his cravat. Supposing--supposing
debonair Lord John was no longer debonair? Supposing--he dared not
suppose anything. Nervously he drew a roll of parchment from his pocket
and stood fingering it.

A firm hand was laid on the door-handle, turning it cleanly round. The
door opened to admit a veritable apparition, and was closed again with a
snap.

The lawyer found himself gazing at a slight, rather tall gentleman who
swept him a profound bow, gracefully flourishing his smart
three-cornered hat with one hand and delicately clasping cane and
perfumed handkerchief with the other. He was dressed in the height of
the Versailles fashion, with full-skirted coat of palest lilac laced
with silver, small-clothes and stockings of white, and waistcoat of
flowered satin. On his feet he wore shoes with high red heels and silver
buckles, while a wig of the latest mode, marvellously powdered and
curled and smacking greatly of Paris, adorned his shapely head. In the
foaming lace of his cravat reposed a diamond pin, and on the slim hand,
half covered by drooping laces, glowed and flashed a huge emerald.

The lawyer stared and stared again, and it was not until a pair of deep
blue, rather wistful eyes met his in a quizzical glance, that he found
his tongue. Then a look of astonishment came into his face, and he took
a half step forward.

"Master Jack!" he gasped. "Master--_Jack_!"

The elegant gentleman came forward and held up a reproving hand. The
patch at the corner of his mouth quivered, and the blue eyes danced.

"I perceive that you are not acquainted with me, Mr. Warburton," he
said, amusement in his pleasant, slightly drawling voice. "Allow me to
present myself: Sir Anthony Ferndale, _a vous servir_!"

A gleam of humour appeared in the lawyer's own eyes as he clasped the
outstretched hand.

"I think you are perhaps not acquainted with yourself, my lord," he
remarked drily.

Lord John laid his hat and cane on the small table, and looked faintly
intrigued.

"What's your meaning, Mr. Warburton?"

"I am come, my lord, to inform you that the Earl, your father, died a
month since."

The blue eyes widened, grew of a sudden hard, and narrowed again.

"Is that really so? Well, well! Apoplexy, I make no doubt?"

The lawyer's lips twitched uncontrollably.

"No, Master Jack; my lord died of heart failure."

"Say you so? Dear me! But will you not be seated, sir? In a moment my
servant will have induced the _chef_ to serve dinner. You will honour
me, I trust?"

The lawyer murmured his thanks and sat down on the settle, watching the
other with puzzled eyes.

The Earl drew up a chair for himself and stretched his foot to the fire.

"Six years, eh? I protest 'tis prodigious good to see your face again,
Mr. Warburton.... And I'm the Earl? Earl and High Toby, by Gad!" He
laughed softly.

"I have here the documents, my lord...."

Carstares eyed the roll through his quizzing glass.

"I perceive them. Pray return them to your pocket, Mr. Warburton."

"But there are certain legal formalities, my lord--"

"Exactly. Pray do not let us mention them!"

"But, sir!"

Then the Earl smiled, and his smile was singularly sweet and winning.

"At least, not until after dinner, Warburton! Instead, you shall tell me
how you found me?"

"Mr. Richard directed me where to come, sir."

"Ah, of course! I had forgot that I told him my--_pied-à-terre_ when I
waylaid him."

The lawyer nearly shuddered at this cheerful, barefaced mention of his
lordship's disreputable profession.

"Er--indeed, sir. Mr. Richard is eager for you to return."

The handsome young face clouded over. My lord shook his head.

"Impossible, my dear Warburton. I am convinced Dick never voiced so
foolish a suggestion. Come now, confess! 'tis your own fabrication?"

Warburton ignored the bantering tone and spoke very deliberately.

"At all events, my lord, I believe him anxious to make--amends."

Carstares shot an alert, suspicious glance at him.

"Ah!"

"Yes, sir. Amends."

My lord studied his emerald with half-closed eyelids.

"But why--amends, Warburton?" he asked.

"Is not that the word, sir?"

"I confess it strikes me as inapt. Doubtless I am dull of
comprehension."

"You were not wont to be, my lord."

"No? But six years changes a man, Warburton. Pray, is Mr. Carstares
well?"

"I believe so, sir," replied the lawyer, frowning at the deft change of
subject.

"And Lady Lavinia?"

"Ay." Mr. Warburton looked searchingly across at him, seeing which, my
lord's eyes danced afresh, brim full with mischief.

"I am delighted to hear it. Pray present my compliments to Mr. Carstares
and beg him to use Wyncham as he wills."

"Sir! Master Jack! I implore you!" burst from the lawyer, and he sprang
up, moving excitedly away, his hands twitching, his face haggard.

My lord stiffened in his chair. He watched the other's jerky movements
anxiously, but his voice when he spoke was even and cold.

"Well, sir?"

Mr. Warburton wheeled and came back to the fireplace, looking hungrily
down at my lord's impassive countenance. With an effort he seemed to
control himself.

"Master Jack, I had better tell you what you have already guessed. I
know."

Up went one haughty eyebrow.

"You know what, Mr. Warburton?"

"That you are innocent!"

"Of what, Mr. Warburton?"

"Of cheating at cards, sir!"

My lord relaxed, and flicked a speck of dust from his great cuff.

"I regret the necessity of having to disillusion you, Mr. Warburton."

"My lord, do not fence with me, I beg! You can trust me, surely?"

"Certainly, sir."

"Then do not keep up this pretence with me; no, nor look so hard
neither! I've watched you grow up right from the cradle, and Master Dick
too, and I know you both through and through. I _know_ you never cheated
at Colonel Dare's nor anywhere else! I could have sworn it at the
time--ay, when I saw Master Dick's face, I knew at once that he it was
who had played foul, and you had but taken the blame!"

"No!"

"I know better! Can you, Master Jack, look me in the face and truthfully
deny what I have said? Can you? Can you?" My lord sat silent.

With a sigh, Warburton sank on to the settle once more. He was flushed,
and his eyes shone, but he spoke calmly again.

"Of course you cannot. I have never known you lie. You need not fear I
shall betray you. I kept silence all these years for my lord's sake, and
I will not speak now until you give me leave."

"Which I never shall."

"Master Jack, think better of it, I beg of you! Now that my lord is
dead--"

"It makes no difference."

"No difference? 'Twas not for his sake? 'Twas not because you knew how
he loved Master Dick?"

"No."

"Then 'tis Lady Lavinia--"

"No."

"But--"

My lord smiled sadly.

"Ah, Warburton! And you averred you knew us through and through! For
whose sake should it be but his own?"

"I feared it!" The lawyer made a hopeless gesture with his hands. "You
will not come back?"

"No, Warburton, I will not; Dick may manage my estates. I remain on the
road."

Warburton made one last effort.

"My lord!" he cried despairingly, "Will you not at least think of the
disgrace to the name an you be caught?"

The shadows vanished from my lord's eyes.

"Mr. Warburton, I protest you are of a morbid turn of mind! Do you know,
I had not thought of so unpleasant a contingency? I swear I was not born
to be hanged!"

The lawyer would have said more, had not the entrance of a servant,
carrying a loaded tray, put an end to all private conversation. The man
placed dishes upon the table, lighted candles, and arranged two chairs.

"Dinner is served, sir," he said.

My lord nodded, and made a slight gesture toward the windows. Instantly
the man went over to them and drew the heavy curtains across.

My lord turned to Mr. Warburton.

"What say you, sir? Shall it be burgundy or claret, or do you prefer
sack?"

Warburton decided in favour of claret.

"Claret, Jim," ordered Carstares, and rose to his feet.

"I trust the drive has whetted your appetite, Warburton, for honest
Chadber will be monstrous hurt an you do not justice to his capons."

"I shall endeavour to spare his feelings," replied the lawyer with a
twinkle, and seated himself at the table.

Whatever might be Mr. Chadber's failings, he possessed an excellent
cook. Mr. Warburton dined very well, beginning on a fat duck, and
continuing through the many courses that constituted the meal.

When the table was cleared, the servant gone, and the port before them,
he endeavoured to guide the conversation back into the previous
channels. But he reckoned without my lord, and presently found himself
discussing the Pretender's late rebellion. He sat up suddenly.

"There were rumours that you were with the Prince, sir."

Carstares set down his glass in genuine amazement.

"I?"

"Indeed, yes. I do not know whence the rumour came, but it reached
Wyncham. My lord said nought, but I think Mr. Richard hardly credited
it."

"I should hope not! Why should they think me turned rebel, pray?"

Mr. Warburton frowned.

"Rebel, sir?"

"Rebel, Mr. Warburton. I have served under his Majesty."

"The Carstares were ever Tories, Master Jack, true to their rightful
king."

"My dear Warburton, I owe nought to the Stuart princes. I was born in
King George the First's reign, and I protest I am a good Whig."

Warburton shook his head disapprovingly.

"There has never been a Whig in the Wyncham family, sir."

"And you hope there never will be again, eh? What of Dick? Is he
faithful to the Pretender?"

"I think Mr. Richard does not interest himself in politics, sir."

Carstares raised his eyebrows, and there fell a silence.

After a minute or two Mr. Warburton cleared his throat.

"I--I suppose, sir--you have no idea of--er--discontinuing
your--er--profession?"

My lord gave an irrepressible little laugh.

"Faith, Mr. Warburton, I've only just begun!"

"Only--But a year ago, Mr. Richard--"

"I held him up? Ay, but to tell the truth, sir, I've not done much since
then!"

"Then, sir, you are not--er--notorious?"

"Good gad, no! Notorious, forsooth! Confess, Warburton, you thought me
some heroic figure? 'Gentleman Harry', perhaps?"

Warburton blushed.

"Well, sir--I--er--wondered."

"I shall have to disappoint you, I perceive. I doubt Bow Street has
never heard of me--and--to tell the truth--'tis not an occupation which
appeals vastly to my senses."

"Then why, my lord, do you continue?"

"I must have some excuse for roaming the country," pleaded Jack. "I
could not be idle."

"You are not--compelled to--er--rob, my lord?"

Carstares wrinkled his brow inquiringly.

"Compelled? Ah--I take your meaning. No, Warburton, I have enough for my
wants--now; time was--but that is past. I rob for amusement's sake."

Warburton looked steadily across at him.

"I am surprised, my lord, that you, a Carstares, should find
it--amusing."

John was silent for a moment, and when he at length spoke it was
defiantly and with a bitterness most unusual in him.

"The world, Mr. Warburton, has not treated me so kindly that I should
feel any qualms of conscience. But, an it gives you any satisfaction to
know it, I will tell you that my robberies are few and far between. You
spoke a little while ago of my probable--ah--fate--on Tyburn Tree. I
think you need not fear to hear of that."

"I--It gives me great satisfaction, my lord, I confess," stammered the
lawyer, and found nothing more to say. After a long pause he again
produced the bulky roll of parchment and laid it down before the Earl
with the apologetic murmur of:

"Business, my lord!"

Carstares descended from the clouds and eyed the packet with evident
distaste. He proceeded to fill his and his companion's glass very
leisurely. That done, he heaved a lugubrious sigh, caught Mr.
Warburton's eye, laughed in answer to its quizzical gleam, and broke the
seal.

"Since you _will_ have it, sir--business!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Warburton stayed the night at the Chequers and travelled back to
Wyncham next day by the two o'clock coach. He played piquet and ecarte
with my lord all the evening, and then retired to bed, not having found
an opportunity to argue his mission as he had hoped to do. Whenever he
had tried to turn the conversation that way he had been gently but
firmly led into safer channels, and somehow had found it impossible to
get back. My lord was the gayest and most charming of companions, but
talk "business" he would not. He regaled the lawyer with spicy anecdotes
and tales of abroad, but never once allowed Mr. Warburton to speak of
his home or of his brother.

The lawyer retired to rest in a measure reassured by the other's good
spirits, but at the same time dispirited by his failure to induce
Carstares to return to Wyncham.

Next morning, although he was not up until twelve, he was before my
lord, who only appeared in time for lunch, which was served as before in
the oak parlour.

He entered the room in his usual leisurely yet decided fashion and made
Mr. Warburton a marvellous leg. Then he bore him off to inspect his
mare, Jenny, of whom he was inordinately proud. By the time they
returned to the parlour luncheon was served, and Mr. Warburton realised
that he had scarcely any time left in which to plead his cause.

My lord's servant hovered continually about the room, waiting on them,
until his master bade him go to attend to the lawyer's valise. When the
door had closed on his retreating form, Carstares leaned back in his
chair, and, with a rather dreary little smile, turned to his companion.

"You want to reason with me, I know, Mr. Warburton, and, indeed, I will
listen an I must. But I would so much rather that you left the subject
alone, believe me."

Warburton sensed the finality in his voice, and wisely threw away his
last chance.

"I understand 'tis painful, my lord, and I will say no more. Only
remember--and think on it, I beg!"

The concern in his face touched my lord.

"You are too good to me, Mr. Warburton, I vow. I can only say that I
appreciate your kindness--and your forbearance. And I trust that you
will forgive my seeming churlishness and believe that I am indeed
grateful to you."

"I wish I might do more for you, Master Jack!" stammered Warburton, made
miserable by the wistful note in his favourite's voice. There was no
time for more; the coach already awaited him, and his valise had been
hoisted up. As they stood together in the porch, he could only grip my
lord's hand tightly and say good-bye. Then he got hurriedly into the
coach, and the door was slammed behind him.

My lord made his leg, and watched the heavy vehicle move forward and
roll away down the street. Then with a stifled sigh he turned and walked
towards the stables. His servant saw him coming and went at once to meet
him.

"The mare, sir?"

"As you say, Jim--the mare. In an hour."

He turned and would have strolled back.

"Sir--your honour!"

He paused, looking over his shoulder.

"Well?"

"They're on the look-out, sir. Best be careful."

"They always are, Jim. But thanks."

"Ye--ye wouldn't take me with ye, sir?" pleadingly.

"Take you? Faith, no! I've no mind to lead you into danger. And you
serve me best by remaining to carry out my orders."

The man fell back.

"Ay, sir; but--but--"

"There are none, Jim."

"No, sir--but ye _will_ have a care?"

"I will be the most cautious of men." He walked away on the word, and
passed into the house.

In an hour he was a very different being. Gone was the emerald ring, the
foppish cane; the languid air, too, had disappeared, leaving him brisk
and businesslike. He was dressed for riding, with buff coat and buckskin
breeches, and shining top boots. A sober brown wig replaced the powdered
creation, and a black tricorne was set rakishly atop.

He stood in the deserted porch, watching Jim strap his baggage to the
saddle, occasionally giving a curt direction. Presently Mr. Chadber
appeared with the stirrup-cup, which he drained and handed back with a
word of thanks and a guinea at the bottom.

Someone called lustily from within, and the landlord, bowing very low,
murmured apologies and vanished.

Jim cast a last glance at the saddle-girths, and, leaving the mare
quietly standing in the road, came up to his master with gloves and
whip.

Carstares took them silently and fell to tapping his boot, his eyes
thoughtfully on the man's face.

"You will hire a coach, as usual," he said at length, "and take my
baggage to--" (He paused, frowning)--"Lewes. You will engage a room at
the White Hart and order dinner. I shall wear--apricot and--h'm!"

"Blue, sir?" ventured Jim, with an idea of being helpful.

His master's eyes crinkled at the corners.

"You are a humorist, Salter. Apricot and cream. Cream? Yes, 'tis a
pleasing thought--cream. That is all--Jenny!"

The mare turned her head, whinnying as he came towards her.

"Good lass!" He mounted lightly and patted her glossy neck. Then he
leaned sideways in the saddle to speak again to Salter, who stood beside
him, one hand on the bridle.

"The cloak?"

"Behind you, sir."

"My wig?"

"Yes, sir."

"Pistols?"

"Ready primed, sir."

"Good. I shall be in Lewes in time for dinner--with luck."

"Yes, sir. Ye--ye will have a care?" anxiously.

"Have I not told you?" He straightened in the saddle, touched the mare
with his heel, and bestowing a quick smile and a nod on his man, trotted
easily away.




CHAPTER II

MY LORD AT THE WHITE HART


"Sir Anthony Ferndale" sat before the dressing-table in his room at the
White Hart, idly polishing his nails. A gorgeous silk dressing gown lay
over the back of his chair, and, behind him, Jim was attending to his
wig, at the same time hovering anxiously over the coat and waistcoat
that were waiting to be donned.

Carstares left off polishing his nails, yawned, and leaned back in his
chair, a slim, graceful figure in cambric shirt and apricot satin
breeches. He studied his cravat for some moments in the mirror, and
lifted a hand to it. Salter held his breath. With extreme deliberation
the hand moved a diamond and emerald pin the fraction of an inch to one
side, and fell to his side again. Salter drew a relieved breath, which
brought his master's eyes round to himself.

"No trouble, Jim?"

"None at all, sir."

"Neither had I. 'Twas most surprisingly easy. The birds had no more
fight in them than sparrows. Two men in a coach--one a bullying rascal
of a merchant, the other his clerk. Gad! but I was sorry for that little
man!" He paused, his hand on the rouge pot.

Salter looked an inquiry.

"Yes," nodded Carstares. "Very sorry. The fat man would appear to bully
and browbeat him after the manner of his kind; he even blamed him for my
advent, the greasy coward! Yes, Jim, you are right--he did not appeal to
me, _ce M. Fudby_. So--" ingenuously, "I relieved him of his cash-box
and two hundred guineas. A present for the poor of Lewes."

Jim jerked his shoulder, frowning.

"If ye give away all ye get, sir, why do ye rob at all?" he asked
bluntly.

His whimsical little smile played about my lord's mouth.

"'Tis an object for my life, Jim: a noble object. And I believe it
amuses me to play Robin Hood--take from the rich to give to the poor,"
he added, for Salter's benefit. "But to return to my victims--you would
have laughed had you but seen my little man come tumbling out of the
coach when I opened the door!"

"Tumble, sir? Why should he do that?"

"He was at pains to explain the reason. It seems he had been commanded
to hold the door to prevent my entering--so when I jerked it open,
sooner than loose his hold, he fell out on to the road. Of course, I
apologised most abjectly--and we had some conversation. Quite a nice
little man.... It made me laugh to see him sprawling on the road,
though!"

"Wish I could have seen it, your honour. I would ha' liked fine to ha'
been beside ye." He looked down at the lithe form with some pride. "I'd
give something to see ye hold up a coach, sir!"

Haresfoot in hand, Jack met his admiring eyes in the glass, and laughed.

"I make no doubt you would.... I have cultivated a superb voice, a
trifle thick and beery, a little loud, perhaps--ah, something to dream
of o' nights! I doubt they do, too," he added reflectively, and affixed
the patch at the corner of his mouth.

"So? A little low, you think? But 'twill suffice--What's toward?"

Down below in the street there was a great stirring and bustling:
horses' hoofs, shouts from the ostlers, and the sound of wheels on the
cobble-stones. Jim went to the window and looked down, craning his neck
to see over the balcony.

"'Tis a coach arrived, sir."

"That much had I gathered," replied my lord, busy with the powder.

"Yes, sir. O lord, sir!" He was shaken with laughter.

"What now?"

"'Tis the curiousest sight, sir! Two gentlemen, one fat and t'other
small! One's all shrivelled-looking, like a spider, while t'other--"

"Resembles a hippopotamus--particularly in the face?"

"Well yes, sir. He do rather. And he be wearing purple."

"Heavens, yes! Purple, and an orange waistcoat!"

Jim peered afresh.

"So it is, sir! But how did you know?" Even as he put the question,
understanding flashed into Jim's eyes.

"I rather think that I have had the honour of meeting these gentlemen,"
replied my lord placidly. "My buckle, Jim.... Is't a prodigious great
coach with wheels picked out in yellow?"

"Ay, your honour. The gentlemen seem a bit put out, too."

"That is quite probable. Does the smaller gentleman wear
somewhat--ah--muddied garments?"

"I can't see, sir; he stands behind the fat gentleman."

"Mr. Bumble Bee.... Jim!"

"Sir!" Jim turned quickly at the sound of the sharp voice.

He found that my lord had risen, and was holding up a waistcoat of
pea-green pattern on a bilious yellow ground, between a disgusted finger
and thumb. Before his severe frown Jim dropped his eyes and stood
looking for all the world like a schoolboy detected in some crime.

"You put this--this monstrosity--out for _me_ to wear?" in awful tones.

Jim eyed the waistcoat gloomily and nodded.

"Yes, sir."

"Did I not specify cream ground?"

"Yes, sir. I thought--I thought that 'twas cream!"

"My good friend, it is--it is--I cannot say what it is. And pea-green!"
he shuddered. "Remove it."

Jim hurried forward and disposed of the offending garment.

"And bring me the broidered satin. Yes, that is it. It is particularly
pleasing to the eye."

"Yes, sir," agreed the abashed Jim.

"You are excused this time," added my lord, with a twinkle in his eye.
"What are our two friends doing?"

Salter went back to the window

"They've gone into the house, sir. No, here's the spider gentleman! He
do seem in a hurry, your honour!"

"Ah!" murmured his lordship. "You may assist me into this coat. Thanks."

With no little difficulty, my lord managed to enter into the fine satin
garment, which, when on, seemed moulded to his back, so excellently did
it fit. He shook out his ruffles and slipped the emerald ring on to his
finger with a slight frown.

"I believe I shall remain here some few days," he remarked presently.
"To--ah--allay suspicion." He looked across at his man as he spoke,
through his lashes.

It was not in Jim's nature to inquire into his master's affairs, much
less to be surprised at anything he might do or say. He was content to
receive and promptly execute his orders, and to worship Carstares with a
dog-like devotion, following blindly in his wake, happy as long as he
might serve him.

Carstares had found him in France, very down upon his luck, having been
discharged from the service of his late master owing to the penniless
condition of that gentleman's pocket. He had engaged him as his own
personal servant, and the man had remained with him ever since, proving
an invaluable acquisition to my Lord John. Despite a singularly wooden
countenance, he was by no means a fool, and he had helped Carstares out
of more than one tight corner during his inglorious and foolhardy career
as highwayman. He probably understood his somewhat erratic master better
than anyone else, and he now divined what was in his mind. He returned
that glance with a significant wink.

"'Twas them gentlemen ye held up to-day, sir?" he asked, jerking an
expressive thumb towards the window.

"M'm. Mr. Bumble Bee and friend. It would almost appear so. I think I do
not fully appreciate Mr. Bumble Bee. I find his conduct rather tiresome.
But it is just possible that he thinks the same of me. I will further my
acquaintance with him."

Jim grunted scornfully, and an inquiring eye was cocked at him.

"You do not admire our friend? Pray, do not judge him by his exterior.
He may possess a beautiful mind. But I do not think so. N-no, I really
do not think so." He chuckled a little. "Do you know, Jim, I believe I
am going to enjoy myself to-night!"

"I don't doubt it, your honour. 'Twere child's play to trick the fat
gentleman."

"Probably. But it is not with the fat gentleman that I shall have to
deal. 'Tis with all the officials of this charming town, an I mistake
not. Do I hear the small spider returning?"

Salter stepped back to the window.

"Ay, sir--with three others."

"Pre-cisely. Be so good as to hand me my snuff-box. And my cane. Thank
you. I feel the time has now come for me to put in an appearance. Pray,
bear in mind that I am new come from France and journey by easy stages
to London. And cultivate a stupid expression. Yes, that will do
excellently."

Jim grinned delightedly; he had assumed no expression of stupidity, and
was consequently much pleased with this pleasantry. He swung open the
door with an air, and watched "Sir Anthony" mince along the passage to
the stairs.

In the coffee-room the city merchant, Mr. Fudby by name, was relating
the story of his wrongs, with many an impressive pause, and much
emphasis, to the mayor, town-clerk, and beadle of Lewes. All three had
been fetched by Mr. Chilter, his clerk, in obedience to his orders, for
the bigger the audience the better pleased was Mr. Fudby. He was now
enjoying himself quite considerably, despite the loss of his precious
cash-box.

So was not Mr. Hedges, the mayor. He was a fussy little man who suffered
from dyspepsia; he was not interested in the affair, and he did not see
what was to be done for Mr. Fudby. Further, he had been haled from his
dinner, and he was hungry; and, above all, he found Mr. Fudby very
unattractive. Still, a highroad robbery was serious matter enough, and
some course of action must be thought out; so he listened to the story
with an assumption of interest, looking exceedingly wise, and, at the
proper moments, uttering sounds betokening concern.

The more he saw and heard of Mr. Fudby, the less he liked him. Neither
did the town-clerk care for him. There was that about Mr. Fudby that did
not endear him to his fellow-men, especially when they chanced to be his
inferiors in the social scale. The beadle did not think much about
anything. Having decided (and rightly) that the affair had nothing
whatever to do with him, he leaned back in his chair and stared stolidly
up at the ceiling.

The tale Mr. Fudby was telling bore surprisingly little resemblance to
the truth. It was a much embellished version, in which he himself had
behaved with quite remarkable gallantry. It had been gradually concocted
during the journey to Lewes.

He was still holding forth when my lord entered the room. Carstares
raised his glass languidly to survey the assembled company, bowed
slightly, and walked over to the fire. He seated himself in an armchair
and took no further notice of anybody.

Mr. Hedges had recognised at a glance that here was some _grand
seigneur_ and wished that Mr. Fudby would not speak in so loud a voice.
But that individual, delighted at having a new auditor, continued his
tale with much relish and in a still louder tone.

My lord yawned delicately and took a pinch of snuff.

"Yes, yes," fussed Mr. Hedges. "But, short of sending to London for the
Runners, I do not see what I can do. If I send to London, it must, of
course, be at your expense, sir."

Mr. Fudby bristled.

"At _my_ expense, sir? Do ye say at _my_ expense? I am surprised! I
repeat--I am surprised!"

"Indeed, sir? I can order the town-crier out, describing the horse,
and--er--offering a reward for the capture of any man on such an
animal. But--" he shrugged and looked across at the town-clerk--"I do
not imagine that 'twould be of much use--eh, Mr. Brand?"

The clerk pursed his lips and spread out his hands.

"I fear not; I very much fear not. I would advise Mr. Fudby to have a
proclamation posted up round the country." He sat back with the air of
one who has contributed his share to the work, and does not intend to
offer any more help.

"Ho!" growled Mr. Fudby. He blew out his cheeks. "'Twill be a grievous
expense, though I suppose it must be done, and I cannot but feel that if
it had not been for your deplorably cowardly conduct, Chilter--yes,
cowardly conduct, I say--I might never have been robbed of my two
hundred!" He snuffled a little, and eyed the flushed but silent Chilter
with mingled reproach and scorn. "However, my coachman assures me he
could swear to the horse again, although he cannot remember much about
the man himself. Chilter! How did he describe the horse?"

"Oh--er--chestnut, Mr. Fudby--chestnut, with a half-moon of white on its
forehead, and one white foreleg."

Jack perceived that it was time he took a hand in the game. He half
turned in his chair and levelled his quizzing-glass at Mr. Chilter.

"I beg your pardon?" he drawled.

Mr. Fudby's eye brightened. The fine gentleman was roused to an
expression of interest at last. He launched forth into his story once
more for my lord's benefit. Carstares eyed him coldly, seeing which, Mr.
Hedges came hurriedly to the rescue.

"Er--yes, Mr. Fudby--quite so! Your pardon, sir, I have not the honour
of knowing your name?"

"Ferndale," supplied Jack, "Sir Anthony Ferndale."

"Er--yes--" Mr. Hedges bowed. "Pray pardon my importuning you with
our--"

"Not at all," said my lord.

"No--quite so--The fact is, these--er--gentlemen have had
the--er--misfortune to be waylaid on their journey here."

Sir Anthony's glass was again levelled at the group. His expression
betokened mild surprise.

"_All_ these gentlemen?" he inquired blandly. "Dear, dear!"

"Oh, no, no, no, sir! Not all--Only Mr.--er--"

"Fudby," said that worthy, and discovered that Sir Anthony was bowing
frigidly. At once he rose, and resting his knuckles on the table before
him, bent his body slowly and painfully. Sir Anthony inclined his head.
Whereupon, to the delight of all the rest, Mr. Fudby bowed again with
even greater stateliness than before. Mr. Hedges observed Sir Anthony's
lips to twitch convulsively. He waited for Mr. Fudby to subside, and
then continued:

"Yes--Mr. Fudby and Mr.--"

"My clerk!" snapped Fudby.

Sir Anthony favoured Mr. Chilter with his peculiarly sweet smile, and
turned again to Mr. Hedges.

"I see. A _daylight_ robbery, you say?"

"Broad daylight!" boomed Mr. Fudby.

"Er--yes, yes," interposed the mayor, fearing a fresh outbreak from that
quarter. "I wonder if you have seen anything of such an animal as
Mr.--er--Chilter--described?"

"'Tis a most extraordinary thing," said Carstares slowly, "but I have
just bought such an one." He glanced round with an inquiring smile and
one eyebrow lifted.

"Well!" ejaculated Mr. Fudby. "Well!"

"Dear me, sir, what a strange coincidence! May I ask where you bought
it, and from whom?"

"She has not been in my possession over two hours. I bought her from an
out-at-elbows ruffian, on my way hither. I thought at one time that
'twas strange that the man should possess such a mare--pure bred, I
vow--and wondered why he was so eager to be rid of her."

"He was eager because he knew he would be recognised by her," explained
Mr. Fudby kindly.

"Without doubt. Perhaps you would like to see her? I will send my man--"

"Oh no, no!" cried the mayor. "We would not dream of so inconveniencing
you--"

"'Twere a pleasure," bowed Jack, devoutly hoping that Mr. Fudby would
not require to see Jenny, who, he felt sure, would betray him by her
very evident affection.

"No, no, Sir Anthony, 'tis quite unnecessary, I assure you, but I thank
you for all that. Mr. Fudby, if you would describe the man himself, I
will see to the proclamation."

"Describe him, Chilter!" ordered Mr. Fudby, who was becoming rather
grumpy.

Mr. Chilter smiled suddenly.

"Certainly, sir!" he said with alacrity. "'Twas a great ruffianly
fellow, monstrous tall--"

"How tall?" interrupted the town-clerk. "Six feet?"

"Oh, quite!" lied Mr. Chilter. "And fat."

Jack's shoulders shook.

"Fat, you say?" he asked gently.

"Very fat," affirmed Mr. Chilter. "And prodigious rough, swearing
dreadfully in his speech."

"You could not see his face, I suppose?"

Mr. Chilter hesitated.

"I could see his mouth and chin," he said, "and I remarked a long scar
running from his under-lip to the--er--bottom of his face."

Involuntarily Carstares' hand caressed his perfectly smooth chin. Either
the little clerk was a born romancer, or for some reason or other he did
not want the highwayman to be taken.

"Well, Sir Anthony?" the mayor was saying. "Does that description fit
your man?"

My lord frowned thoughtfully.

"Tall," he said slowly, "and fat--you said fat, I think, Mr. Chilter?"

Rather anxiously Mr. Chilter reiterated this statement.

"Ah! And with a long scar--yes, that is undoubtedly he. Furthermore," he
added audaciously, "he has a squint in his left eye. 'Tis a most
ill-favoured rogue in all."

"It would appear so, Sir Anthony," remarked the mayor drily. He did not
in the least believe the story of the squint, and imagined that the fine
court gentleman was amusing himself at their expense. Nevertheless, he
had no intention of remonstrating; the sooner he could withdraw from
this very tiresome affair the better. So he gravely took down all the
absurd particulars, remarked that the man should be easy to find, and
made ready to depart.

The town-clerk rose, and tapped the beadle on the shoulder, whereupon
that worthy, with a grunt, abandoned his pose of masterly inactivity and
followed the mayor out of the room.

Mr. Fudby rose.

"I doubt I shall never see my money again," he said pettishly. "If you,
Chilter had not been so--"

"Allow me to offer you some snuff, Mr. Chilter," interposed my lord
gently, extending his jewelled box. "Doubtless, sir, you would wish to
see my mare?"

"I know nought of horses," snorted Mr. Fudby. "'Tis my clerk who appears
to have remarked all the details." He sneered terrifically.

"Then pray, do me the honour of walking as far as the stables, Mr.
Chilter. 'Twere as well to be certain about the mare. Mr.-ah--Fudby,
your servant."

       *       *       *       *       *

"And now, Mr. Chilter, I have a grudge against you," said Carstares, as
they walked across the little garden.

"Me, sir? Oh--er--have you, Sir Anthony?"

He looked up and perceived that the gentleman was laughing.

"Yes, Mr. Chilter, a very serious grudge: you have described me as fat!"

Chilter nearly fainted.

"_You_, sir," he gasped, and stared in amazement.

"Also that I swear dreadfully in my speech, and that I have a scar
running from my mouth to my chin."

Mr. Chilter stood stock-still in the middle of the path.

"It was you, sir, all the time? _You_ held us up? Were _you_ the man who
wrenched open the door?"

"I was that infamous scoundrel. I beg leave once more to apologise for
my carelessness in opening that same door. Now tell me, why did you
take such pains to throw dust in their sleepy eyes?"

They resumed their walk slowly. The little clerk flushed.

"I scarce know, sir, save that I--that I liked you, and--and--"

"I see. 'Twas prodigious good of you, Mr. Chilter. I wonder if there is
anything that I can do to show my gratitude?"

Again the clerk flushed and lifted his head proudly.

"I thank you, sir, but there is nought."

By now they had reached the stable. Carstares opened the door and they
entered.

"Then will you accept this in token of my regard, sir?"

Mr. Chilter gazed at the emerald ring that glowed and winked at him from
the palm of my lord's hand. He looked up into the blue eyes and
stammered a little.

"Indeed, sir--I--I--"

"'Tis honestly come by!" pleadingly. "Come, Mr. Chilter, you'll not hurt
my feelings by refusing? You will keep it in remembrance of a man--a fat
man, Mr. Chilter--who rudely jerked you on to the road?"

The clerk took it with unsteady fingers.

"I thank you most--"

"Nay, I beg of you. 'Tis I thank you for aiding me so kindly.... Come
and see my Jenny! Well, lass?" For the mare at the first sound of his
voice had turned in her loose-box, and was whinnying and pawing the
ground eagerly.

"I do not understand, sir, anything: how it is that you are a
highwayman, or why you have honoured me with your confidence--why you
should trust me. But--thank you."

As he spoke, Mr. Chilter placed his hand in my lord's, and for the
second time in his life, felt the pressure of those firm, kindly
fingers.

"Why, your honour! Ye've lost your emerald!"

"No, Jim. I gave it away."

"Ye--ye _gave_ it away, sir?"

"M'm. To the small spider."

"B-but--"

"And he called me fat, too."

"Called ye fat, sir?" asked the man, bewildered.

"Yes. Very fat. By the way, let me tell you that I bought Jenny at
Fittering to-day from the naughty ruffian who waylaid Mr. Bumble Bee."
He proceeded to give Jim a sketch of what had transpired below. When he
had finished the man shook his head severely.

"I doubt ye'll never learn wisdom, sir," he scolded.

"I? What have I done?"

"What did ye want to tell it all to the spider man for, sir? 'Twas most
incautious of ye. Like as not, he'll split to the fat gentleman, and
we'll have the whole town at our heels."

"Which just shows all you know of the small spider," replied his master
calmly. "Hand me the powder."



Wyncham! A stately old house with mullioned windows, standing high on
its stone terraces, half-covered by creepers; a house surrounded by
lawns, rolling down on the one side to a river that rippled and murmured
its way along beneath overhanging trees and a blue sky, over boulders
and rocks, so clear and sparkling that the myriad pebbles could be seen
deep down on its bed.

In the other direction, the velvet lawns stretched away till they met
the orchards and the quiet meadowland.

On two sides the house had its terraces, very white in the sunshine,
with stone steps leading down to a miniature lake where water-lilies
grew, and where the tiny fish darted to and fro unconcernedly.

Flagged walks there were, running between flower beds a riot of colour,
and solemn old trees that had stood there through all the years. Cool
woodland lay beyond the little river, carpeted with dark moss, where in
spring the primroses grew. So thick was the foliage of the trees that
the sun but penetrated in uneven patches.

Up the terrace walls crept roses, yellow and red, pink and white, and
tossed their trailing sprays across the parapet. Over the walls of the
house they climbed, mingling with purple clematis, jasmine, and sickly
honeysuckle. The air was heavy with their united perfumes, while, wafted
from a bed below, came the smoky scent of lavender.

The old house seemed half asleep, basking in the sunlight. Save for a
peacock preening its feathers on the terrace steps, there was no sign of
life....

The old place had harboured generations of Carstares. Earl had succeeded
Earl and reigned supreme, and it was only now that there was no Earl
living there. No one knew where he was. Scarce a month ago one died, but
the eldest son was not there to take his place. For six years he had
been absent, and none dared breathe his name, for he disgraced that
name, and the old Earl cast him off and forbade all mention of him. But
the poor folk of the countryside remembered him. They would tell one
another tales of his reckless courage; his sweet smile and his winning
ways; his light-heartedness and his never-failing kindness and
good-humour. What a rider he was! To see him sit his horse! What a
swordsman! Do ye mind the time he fought young Mr. Welsh over yonder in
the spinney with half the countryside watching? Ah, he was a one, was
Master Jack! Do ye mind how he knocked the sword clean out o' Mr.
Welsh's hand, and then stood waiting for him to pick it up? And do ye
mind the way his eyes sparkled, and how he laughed, just for the sheer
joy o' living?

Endless anecdotes would they tell, and the old gaffers would shake their
heads and sigh, and long for the sight of him again. And they would jerk
their thumbs towards the Manor and shrug their old shoulders
significantly. Who wanted Mr. Richard for squire? Not they, at least.
They knew he was a good squire and a kindly man, but give them Master
John, who would laugh and crack a joke and never wear the glum looks
that Mr. Richard affected.

In the house, Richard Carstares paced to and fro in his library, every
now and again pausing to glance wretchedly up at the portrait of his
brother hanging over his desk. The artist had managed to catch the
expression of those blue eyes, and they smiled down at Richard in just
the way that John was always wont to smile--so gaily, and withal so
wistfully.

Richard was twenty-nine, but already he looked twice his age. He was
very thin, and there were deep lines on his good-looking countenance.
His grey eyes bore a haunted, care-worn look, and his mouth, though
well-shaped, was curiously lacking in determination. He was dressed
soberly, and without that touch of smartness that had characterised him
six years ago. He wore black in memory of his father, and it may have
been that severity, only relieved by the lace at his throat, that made
his face appear so prematurely aged. There was none of his brother's
boyishness about him; even his smile seemed forced and tired, and his
laughter rarely held merriment.

He pulled out his chronometer, comparing it with the clock on the
mantelpiece. His pacing took him to the door, and almost nervously he
pulled it open, listening.

No sound came to his ears. Back again, to and fro across the room,
eagerly awaiting the clanging of a bell. It did not come, but presently
a footfall sounded on the passage without, and someone knocked at the
door.

In two strides Richard was by it, and had flung it wide. Warburton stood
there.

Richard caught his hand.

"Warburton! At last! I have been waiting this hour and more!"

Mr. Warburton disengaged himself, bowing.

"I regret I was not able to come before, sir," he said primly.

"I make no doubt you travelled back as quickly as possible--come in,
sir."

He led the lawyer into the room and shut the door.

"Sit down, Warburton--sit down. You--you found my brother?"

Again Warburton bowed.

"I had the felicity of seeing his lordship, sir."

"He was well? In good spirits? You thought him changed--yes? Aged
perhaps, or--"

"His lordship was not greatly changed, sir."
