On the other hand, of necessity we are precluded from extending our
enquiry to the case of disembodied intelligences, if such be conceived
possible. All created existences must be conditioned, but if we have no
knowledge of what those conditions may be, or means for attaining such
knowledge, we cannot discuss them. Nothing can be affirmed, nothing
denied, concerning the possibility of intelligences existing on the Moon
or even in the Sun if we are unable to ascertain under what limitations
those particular intelligences subsist. Gnomes, sylphs, elves, and
fairies, and all similar conceptions, escape the possibility of discussion
by our ignorance of their properties. As nothing can be asserted of them
they remain beyond investigation, as they are beyond sight and touch.

The only beings, then, the presence of which would justify us in regarding
another world as "inhabited" are such as would justify us in applying that
term to a part of our own world. They must possess intelligence and
consciousness on the one hand; on the other, they must likewise have
corporeal form. True, the form might be imagined as different from that we
possess; but, as with ourselves, the intelligent spirit must be lodged in
and expressed by a living material body. Our enquiry is thus rendered a
physical one; it is the necessities of the living body that must guide us
in it; a world unsuited for living organisms is not, in the sense of this
enquiry, a "habitable" world.

The discussion, as it was carried on sixty years ago by Dr. Whewell and
Sir David Brewster, was essentially a metaphysical, almost a theological
one, and it was chiefly considered in its supposed relationship to certain
religious conceptions. It was urged that it was derogatory to the wisdom
and goodness of the Creator to suppose that He would have created so many
great and glorious orbs without having a definite purpose in so doing, and
that the only purpose for which a world could be made was that it might be
inhabited. So, again, when Dr. A. R. Wallace revived the discussion in
1903, he clearly had a theological purpose in his opening paper, though he
was taking the opposite view from that held by Brewster half a century
earlier.

For myself, if there be any theological significance attaching to the
solving of this problem, I do not know what it is. If we decide that there
are very many inhabited worlds, or that there are few, or that there is
but one--our own--I fail to see how it should modify our religious
beliefs. For example: explorers have made their way across the Antarctic
continent to the South Pole but have found no "inhabitant" there. Has this
fact any theological bearing? or if, on the contrary, a race of men had
been discovered there, what change would it have made in the theological
position of anyone? And if this be so with regard to a new continent on
this earth, why should it be different with regard to the continents of
another planet?

The problem therefore seems not to be theological or metaphysical, but
purely physical. We have simply to ask with regard to each heavenly body
which we pass in review: "Are its physical conditions, so far as we can
ascertain them, such as would render the maintenance of life possible upon
it?" The question is not at all as to how life is generated on a world,
but as to whether, if once in action on a particular world, its activities
could be carried on.




CHAPTER II

THE LIVING ORGANISM


A world for habitation, then, is a world whereon living organisms can
exist that are comparable in intelligence with men. But "men" presuppose
the existence of living organisms of inferior grades. Therefore a world
for habitation must first of all be one upon which it is possible for
living organisms, as such, to exist.

It does not concern us in the present connection how life first came into
existence on this planet. It is sufficient that we know from experience
that life does exist here; and in whatsoever way it was first generated
here, in that same way we may consider that it could have been generated
on another planet.

Nor need any question trouble us as to the precise line of demarkation to
be drawn between inorganic and organic substances, or amongst the latter,
between plants and animals. These are important subjects for discussion,
but they do not affect us here, for we are essentially concerned with the
highest form of organism, the one furthest from these two dividing lines.

It suffices that living organisms do exist here, and exist under
well-defined conditions. Wanting these conditions, they perish. We can, to
a varying degree, determine the physical conditions prevailing upon the
heavenly bodies, and we can ascertain whether these physical conditions
would be favourable, unfavourable, or fatal to the living organism.

What is a living organism? A living organism is such that, though it is
continually changing its substance, its identity, as a whole, remains
essentially the same. This definition is incomplete, but it gives us a
first essential approximation, it indicates the continuance of the whole,
with the unceasing change of the details. Were this definition complete, a
river would furnish us with a perfect example of a living organism,
because, while the river remains, the individual drops of water are
continually changing. There is then something more in the living organism
than the continuity of the whole, with the change of the details.

An analogy, given by Max Verworn, carries us a step further. He likens
life to a flame, and takes a gas flame with its butterfly shape as a
particularly appropriate illustration. Here the shape of the flame remains
constant, even in its details. Immediately above the burner, at the base
of the flame, there is a completely dark space; surrounding this, a bluish
zone that is faintly luminous; and beyond this again, the broad spread of
the two wings that are brightly luminous. The flame, like the river,
preserves its identity of form, while its constituent details--the gases
that feed it--are in continual change. But there is not only a change of
material in the flame; there is a change of condition. Everywhere the gas
from the burner is entering into energetic combination with the oxygen of
the air, with evolution of light and heat. There is change in the
constituent particles as well as change of the constituent particles;
there is more than the mere flux of material through the form; there is
change of the material, and in the process of that change energy is
developed.

A steam-engine may afford us a third illustration. Here fresh material is
continually being introduced into the engine there to suffer change. Part
is supplied as fuel to the fire there to maintain the temperature of the
engine; so far the illustration is analogous to that of the gas flame. But
the engine carries us a step further, for part of the material supplied to
it is water, which is converted into steam by the heat of the fire, and
from the expansion of the steam the energy sought from the machine is
derived. Here again we have change in the material with development of
energy; but there is not only work done in the subject, there is work done
by it.

But the living organism differs from artificial machines in that, of
itself and by itself, it is continuously drawing into itself non-living
matter, converting it into an integral part of the organism, and so
endowing it with the qualities of life. And from this non-living matter it
derives fresh energy for the carrying on of the life of the organism.

The engine and the butterfly gas flame do not give us, any more than the
river, a complete picture of the living organism. The form of the river is
imposed upon it from without; the river is defined by its bed, by the
contour of the country through which it flows. The form and size of the
flame are equally defined by exterior conditions; they are imposed upon it
by the shape of the burner and the pressure of the gas passing through it.
The form of the engine is as its designer has made it. But the form of the
living organism is imposed upon it from within; and, as far as we can
tell, is inherent in it. Here is the wonder and mystery of life: the power
of the living organism to assimilate dead matter, to give it life and
bring it into the law and unity of the organism itself. But it cannot do
this indiscriminately; it is not able thus to convert every dead material;
it is restricted, narrowly restricted, in its action. "One of the chief
characteristics of living matter is found in the continuous range of
chemical reactions which take place between living cells and their
inorganic surroundings. Without cease certain substances are taken up and
disappear in the endless round of chemical reactions in the cell. Other
substances which have been produced by the chemical reactions in living
matter pass out of the cell and reappear in inorganic nature as waste
products of the life process. The whole complex of these chemical
transformations is generally called _Metabolism_. Inorganic matter
contrasts strikingly with living substance. However long a crystal or a
piece of metal is kept in observation, there is no change of the
substance, and the molecules remain the same and in the same number. For
living matter the continuous change of substances is an indispensable
condition of existence. To stop the supply of food material for a certain
time is sufficient to cause a serious lesion of the life process or even
the death of the cell. But the same happens when we hinder the passing out
of the products of chemical transformation from the cell. On the other
hand, we may keep a crystal of lifeless matter in a glass tube carefully
shut up from all exchange of substance with the external world for as many
years as we like. The existence of this crystal will continue without end
and without change of any of its properties. There is no known living
organism which could remain in a dry resting state for an infinitely long
period of time. The longest lived are perhaps the spores of mosses which
can exist in a dry state more than a hundred years. As a rule the seeds of
higher plants show their vital power already weakened after ten years;
most of them do not germinate if kept more than twenty to thirty years.
These experiences lead to the opinion that even dry seeds and spores of
lower plants in their period of rest of vegetation continue the processes
of metabolism to a certain degree. This supposition is confirmed by the
fact that a very slight respiration and production of carbonic acid can be
proved when the seeds contain a small percentage of water. It seems as if
life were weakened in these plant organs to a quite imperceptible degree,
but never, not even temporarily, really suspended.

"Life is, therefore, quite inseparable from chemical reactions, and on the
whole what we call life is nothing else but a complex of innumerable
chemical reactions in the living substance which we call protoplasm."[1]

The essential quality, therefore, of life is continual change, but not
mere change in general. It is that special process of the circulation of
matter which we call metabolism, and this circulation is always connected
with a particular chemical substance--protoplasm.

In this substance five elements are always present and
predominant--carbon, oxygen, nitrogen, hydrogen, and sulphur. The
compounds which these five elements form with each other are most complex
and varied, and they also admit to combination--but in smaller
proportions--some of the other elements, of which phosphorus, potassium,
calcium, magnesium, and iron are the most important.

For protoplasm--using the term in the most general sense--is a chemical
substance, not a mere mixture of a number of chemical elements, nor a mere
mechanical structure. "However differently the various plasma substances
behave in detail, they always exhibit the same general composition as the
other albuminoids out of the five 'organo-genetic elements'--namely in
point of weight, 51-54% carbon, 21-23% oxygen, 15-17% nitrogen, 6-7%
hydrogen, and 1-2% sulphur."[2]

Haeckel, the writer just quoted, describes the plasm, the universal basis
of all the vital phenomena, in the following terms: "In every case where
we have with great difficulty succeeded in examining the plasm as far as
possible and separating it from the plasma-products, it has the appearance
of a colourless, viscous substance, the chief physical property of which
is its peculiar thickness and consistency. The physicist distinguishes
three conditions of inorganic matter--solid, fluid, and gaseous. Active
living protoplasm cannot be strictly described as either fluid or solid in
the physical sense. It presents an intermediate stage between the two
which is best described as viscous; it is best compared to a cold jelly,
or solution of glue. Just as we find the latter substance in all stages
between the solid and the fluid, so we find in the case of protoplasm. The
cause of this softness is the quantity of water contained in the living
matter, which generally amounts to a half of its volume and weight. The
water is distributed between the plasma molecules or the ultimate
particles of living matter in much the same way as it is in the crystals
of salts, but with the important difference that it is very variable in
quantity in the plasm. On this depends the capacity for the absorption or
imbibition in the plasm, and the mobility of its molecules, which is very
important for the performance of the vital actions. However, this capacity
of absorption has definite limits in each variety of plasm; living plasm
is not soluble in water, but absolutely resists the penetration of any
water beyond this limit."[3] And Czapek further tells us that "the most
striking feature of cell life is the fact that an enormous number of
chemical reactions take place within the narrowest space. Most plant cells
do not exceed 0·1 to 0·5 millimetres in diameter. Their greatest volume
therefore can only be an eighth of a cubic millimetre. Nevertheless, in
this minute space we notice in every stage of cell life a considerable
number of chemical reactions which are carried on contemporaneously,
without one disturbing the other in the slightest degree."[4]

It is clear if organic bodies were built up of chemical compounds of small
complexity and great stability that this continuous range of chemical
reactions, this unceasing metabolism, could not take place. It is
therefore a necessary condition for organic substances that they should be
built up of chemical compounds that are most complex and unstable.
"Exactly those substances which are most important for life possess a very
high molecular weight, and consequently very large molecules, in
comparison with inorganic matter. For example: egg-albumin is said to have
the molecular weight of at least 15,000, starch more than 30,000, whilst
the molecular weight of hydrogen is 2, of sulphuric acid and of potassium
nitrate about 100, and the molecular weight of the heaviest metal salts
does not exceed about 300."[5]

To sum up: the living organism, whether it be a simple cell, or the
ordered community of cells making up the perfect plant or animal, is an
entity, a living individual, wherein highly complex and unstable compounds
are unceasingly undergoing chemical reactions, a metabolism essentially
associated with protoplasm. But these complex compounds are, nevertheless,
formed by the combinations of but a few of the elements now known to us.

Many writers on the subject of the habitability of other worlds, from
contemplating the rich and apparently limitless variety of the forms of
life, and the diversity of the conditions under which they exist, have
been led to assume that the basis of life must itself also in like manner
be infinitely broad and infinitely varied. In this they are mistaken. As
we have seen, the elements entering into the composition of organic bodies
are, in the main, few in number. The temperatures at which they can exist
are likewise strictly limited. But, above all, that circulation of matter
which we call Life--the metabolism of vital processes--requires for its
continuance the presence of one indispensable factor--WATER.

Protoplasm itself, as Czapek puts it, is practically an _albumin sol_;
that is to say, it is a chemical substance of which the chief constituents
are albuminous matter and water, and the protoplasm can only take from
without material dissolved in water; it can only eject matter in the same
way. This _osmosis_ is an indispensable condition in the vital process.
And the "streaming" of protoplasm, its continual movement in the cell, can
only be carried on in water.

WATER is the compound of oxygen and hydrogen in the proportion of two
atoms of hydrogen to one of oxygen. It is familiar to us in three states:
solid, liquid, and gaseous, or ice, water, and steam. But it is only in
the liquid state that water is available for carrying on the processes of
life. This fact limits the temperatures at which the organic functions can
be carried on, for water under terrestrial conditions is only liquid for a
hundred degrees; it freezes at 0° Centigrade, it boils at 100° Centigrade.
Necessarily, our experiences are mostly confined within this range, and
therefore we are apt unconsciously to assume that this range is all the
range that is possible, whereas it is but a very small fraction of the
range conceivable, and indeed existing, in cosmical space. In its liquid
state water is a general solvent, and yet pure water is neutral in its
qualities, both characteristics being essential to its usefulness as a
vehicle for the protoplasmic actions. Naturally, this function of water as
a solvent can only exist when water is in the liquid state; solid water,
that is ice, neither dissolves nor flows; and water, when heated to
boiling point, passes into vapour, and so leaves the organism
moistureless, and therefore dead. It is possible to grind a living
organism to a pulp so that the structure of the cells is practically
destroyed, and yet for some reactions which are quite peculiar to life
still to show themselves for some appreciable time. But when the cell-pulp
is heated to the temperature of boiling water, these chemical processes
cannot be longer observed. What is left may then be considered as
definitely dead.

Water is, then, indispensable for the living organism; but there are two
great divisions of such organisms--plants and animals. Animals are
generally, but not universally, free to move, and therefore to travel to
seek their food. But their food is restricted; they cannot directly
convert inorganic matter to their own use; they can only assimilate
organic material. The plant, on the other hand, unlike the animal, can
make use of inorganic material. Plant life, therefore, requires an
abundant supply of water in which the various substances necessary for its
support can be dissolved; it must either be in water, or, if on land,
there must be an active circulation of water both through the atmosphere
and through the soil, so as to bring to it the food that it requires.
Animal life presupposes plant life, for it is always dependent upon it.

Many writers have assumed that life is very widely distributed in
connection with this planet. The assumption is a mistaken one, as has been
well pointed out by Garrett P. Serviss, a charming writer on astronomical
subjects: "On the Earth we find animated existence confined to the surface
of the crust of the globe, to the lower and denser strata of the
atmosphere, and to the film of water that constitutes the oceans. It does
not exist in the heart of the rocks forming the body of the planet nor in
the void of space surrounding it outside the atmosphere. As the Earth
condensed from the original nebula, and cooled and solidified, a certain
quantity of matter remained at its surface in the form of free gases and
unstable compounds, and, within the narrow precincts where these things
were, lying like a thin shell between the huge inert globe of permanently
combined elements below, and the equally unchanging realm of the ether
above, life, a phenomenon depending upon ceaseless changes, combinations
and re-combinations of chemical elements in unstable and temporary union,
made its appearance, and there only we find it at the present time."[6]

"The huge inert globe of permanently combined elements below, and the
equally unchanging realm of the ether above," offer no home for the living
organism; least of all for the highest of such organisms--Man. Both must
be tempered to a condition which will permit and favour continual change,
the metabolism which is the essential feature of life.

"When the earth had to be prepared for the habitation of man, a veil, as
it were, of intermediate being was spread between him and its darkness, in
which were joined, in a subdued measure, the stability and the
insensibility of the earth, and the passion and perishing of mankind.

"But the heavens, also, had to be prepared for his habitation. Between
their burning light,--their deep vacuity, and man, as between the earth's
gloom of iron substance, and man, a veil had to be spread of intermediate
being;--which should appease the unendurable glory to the level of human
feebleness, and sign the changeless motion of the heavens with the
semblance of human vicissitude. Between the earth and man arose the leaf.
Between the heaven and man came the cloud. His life being partly as the
falling leaf and partly as the flying vapour."[7]

The leaf and the cloud are the signs of a habitable world. The leaf--that
is to say, plant life, vegetation--is necessary because animal life is not
capable of building itself up from inorganic material. This step must have
been previously taken by the plant. The cloud, that is to say
water-vapour, is necessary because the plant in its turn cannot directly
assimilate to itself the nitrogen from the atmosphere. The food for the
plant is brought to it by water, and it assimilates it by the help of
water. It is, therefore, upon the question of the presence of water that
the question of the habitability of a given world chiefly turns. In the
physical sense, man is "born of water," and any world fitted for his
habitation must "stand out of the water and in the water."




CHAPTER III

THE SUN


The Sun is, of all the heavenly bodies, the most impressive, and has
necessarily, at all times, attracted the chief attention of men. There are
only two of the heavenly bodies that appear to be more than points of
light, only two that show a surface to the naked eye, and the Sun, being
so much the brighter of the two, and the obvious source of all our light
and heat, and the fosterer of vegetation, readily takes the premier place
in interest. In the present day we know too much about the Sun for anyone
to suppose that it can be the home of organic life; but it is not many
years since its habitability was seriously suggested even by so high an
authority as Sir William Herschel. He conceived that it was possible that
its stores of light and heat might be confined to a relatively thin shell
in its upper atmosphere, and that below this shell a screen of clouds
might so check radiation downward that it would be possible for an inner
nucleus to exist which should be cool and solid. This fancied inner globe
would then necessarily enjoy perpetual daylight, and a climate which knew
no variation from pole to pole. To its inhabitants the entire heavens
would be generally luminous, the light not being concentrated into any one
part of the vault; and it was supposed that, ignorant of time, a happy
race might flourish, cultivating the far-spread solar fields, in perpetual
daylight, and in the serenity of a perpetual spring that was distracted by
no storm.

The picture thus conjured up is a pleasing one, though probably, to the
restless sons of Earth, it would seem to suffer somewhat from monotony.
But we now know that it corresponds in not a single detail to the actual
facts. The study of solar conditions carried on through the last hundred
years has revealed to us, not serenity and peace, but storm, stress, and
commotion on the most gigantic scale. But though we now can dismiss from
our minds the possibility that the Sun can be inhabited, yet it is of such
importance to the maintenance of life on this planet, and by parity of
reasoning to life on any other planet, that a review of its conditions
forms a necessary introduction to our subject. Further, those conditions
themselves will bring out certain principles that are of necessary
application when we come to consider the case of particular planets.

The distance of the Sun from the Earth is often spoken of as the
"astronomical unit"; it is the fundamental measure of astronomy, and all
our information as to the sizes and distances of the various planets rests
upon it. And, as we shall shortly see, the particular problem with which
we are engaged--the habitability of worlds--is directly connected with
these two factors: the size of the world in question, and its distance
from the Sun.

The distance of the Sun has been determined by several different methods
the principles of which do not concern us here, but they agree in giving
the mean distance of the Sun as a little less than 93,000,000 miles; that
is to say, it would require 11,720 worlds as large as our own to be put
side by side in order to bridge the chasm between the two. Or a traveller
going round the Earth at its equator would have to repeat the journey 3730
times before he had traversed a space equal to the Sun's distance.

But knowing the Sun's distance, we are able to deduce its actual diameter,
its superficial extent, and its volume, for its apparent diameter can
readily be measured. Its actual diameter then comes out as 866,400 miles,
or 109·4 times that of the Earth. Its surface exceeds that of the Earth
11,970 times; its volume, 1,310,000 times.

But the weight of the Sun is known as well as its size; this follows as a
consequence of gravitation. For the planets move in orbits under the
influence of the Sun's attraction; the dimensions of their orbits are
known, and the times taken in describing them; the amount of the
attractive force therefore is also known, that is to say, the mass of the
Sun. This is 332,000 times the mass of the Earth; and as the latter has
been determined as equal to about

  6,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 tons

that of the Sun would be equal to

  2,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 tons.

It will be seen that the proportion of the volume of the Sun to that of
the Earth is greater than the proportion of its mass to the Earth's
mass--almost exactly four times greater; so that the mean density of the
Sun can be only one-fourth that of the Earth. Yet, if we calculate the
force of gravity at the surfaces of both Sun and Earth, we find that the
Sun has a great preponderance. Its mass is 332,000 times that of the
Earth, but to compare it with the attraction of the Earth's surface we
must divide by (109·4){2}, since the distance of the Sun's centre from its
surface is 109·4 times as great as the corresponding distance in the case
of the Earth, and the force of gravity diminishes as the square of the
increased distance. This gives the force of gravity at the solar surface
as 27·65 times its power at the surface of the Earth, so that a body
weighing one ton here would weigh 27 tons 13 cwt. if it were taken to the
Sun.[8]

This relation is one of great importance when we realize that the pressure
of the Earth's atmosphere is 14·7 lb. on the square inch at the sea
level; that is to say, if we could take a column of air one square inch in
section, extending from the surface of the Earth upwards to the very limit
of the atmosphere, we should find that it would have this weight. If we
construct a water barometer, the column of water required to balance the
atmosphere must be 34 feet high, while the height of the column of mercury
in a mercurial barometer is 30 inches high, for the weight of 30 cubic
inches of mercury or of 408 cubic inches of water (34 × 12 = 408) is 14·7
lb.

If, now, we ascend a mountain, carrying a mercurial barometer with us we
should find that it would fall about one inch for the first 900 feet of
our ascent; that is to say, we should have left one-thirtieth of the
atmosphere below us by ascending 900 feet. As we went up higher we should
find that we should have to climb more than 900 feet further in order that
the barometer might fall another inch; and each successive inch, as we
went upward, would mean a longer climb. At the height of 2760 feet the
barometer would have fallen three inches; we should have passed through
one-tenth of the atmosphere. At the height of 5800 feet, we should have
passed through one-fifth of the atmosphere, the barometer would have
dropped six inches; and so on, until at about three and a third miles
above sea level the barometer would read fifteen inches, showing that we
had passed through half the atmosphere. Mont Blanc is not quite three
miles high, so that in Europe we cannot climb to the height where half the
atmosphere is left below us, and there is no terrestrial mountain anywhere
which would enable us to double the climb; that is to say, to ascend six
and two-third miles. Could we do so, however, we should find that the
barometer had fallen to seven and a half inches; that the second ascent of
three and a third miles had brought us through half the remaining
atmosphere, so that only one-fourth still remained above us. In the
celebrated balloon ascent made by Mr. Coxwell and Mr. Glaisher on
September 5, 1861, an even greater height was attained, and it was
estimated that the barometer fell at its lowest reading to seven inches,
which would correspond to a height of 39,000 feet.

But on the Sun, where the force of gravity is 27·65 times as great as at
the surface of the Earth, it would, if all the other conditions were
similar, only be necessary to ascend one furlong, instead of three and a
third miles, in order to reach the level of half the surface pressure, and
an ascent of two furlongs would bring us to the level of quarter pressure,
and so on. If then the solar atmosphere extends inwards, below the
apparent surface, it should approximately double in density with each
furlong of descent. These considerations, if taken alone, would point to a
mean density of the Sun not as we know it to be, less than that of the
Earth, but immeasurably greater; but the discordance is sufficiently
explained when we come to another class of facts.

These relate to the temperature of the Sun, and to the enormous amount of
light and heat which it radiates forth continually. This entirely
transcends our power to understand or appreciate. Nevertheless, the
astonishing figures which the best authorities give us may, by their
vastness, convey some rough general impression that may be of service.
Thus Prof. C. A. Young puts the total quantity of sunlight as equivalent
to

  1,575,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 standard candles.

The intensity of sunlight at each point of the Sun's surface is variously
expressed as

  190,000 times that of a standard candle,
  5300 times that of the metal in a Bessemer converter,
  146 times that of a calcium light,
  or, 3·4 times that of an electric arc.

The same authority estimates at 30 _calories_ the value of the _Solar
Constant_; that is to say, the heat which, if our atmosphere were removed,
would be received from the Sun in a minute of time upon a square metre of
the Earth's surface that had the Sun in its zenith, would be sufficient to
raise the temperature of a kilogram of water 30 degrees Centigrade. This
would involve that the heat radiation from each square metre of the Sun's
surface would equal 1,340,000 calories; or sufficient to melt through in
each minute of time a shell of ice surrounding the Sun to the thickness of
58·2 feet. Prof. Abbot's most recent determination of the solar constant
diminishes these estimates by one third; but he still gives the probable
temperature of the solar surface as not far short of 7000 degrees
Centigrade, or about 12,000 degrees Fahrenheit.

The Sun, then, presents us with temperatures and pressures which entirely
surpass our experience on the Earth. The temperatures, on the one hand,
are sufficient to convert into a permanent gas every substance with which
we are acquainted; the pressures, on the other hand, apart from the high
temperatures, would probably solidify every element, and the Sun, as a
whole, would present itself to us as a comparatively small solid globe,
with a density like that of platinum. With both factors in operation, we
have the result already given: a huge globe, more than one hundred times
the diameter of the Earth, yet only one-fourth its density, and gaseous
probably throughout the whole of its enormous bulk.

What effect have these two factors, so stupendous in scale, upon its
visible surface? What is the appearance of the Sun?

It appears to be a large glowing disc, sensibly circular in outline, with
its edge fairly well-defined both as seen in the telescope and as
registered on photographs. In the spectroscope, or when in an eclipse of
the Sun the Moon covers the whole disc, a narrow serrated ring is seen
surrounding the rim, like a velvet pile of a bright rose colour. This
crimson rim, the sierra or _chromosphere_ as it is usually called, is
always to be found edging the entire Sun, and therefore must carpet the
surface everywhere. But under ordinary conditions, we do not see the
chromosphere itself, but look down through it on the _photosphere_, or
general radiating surface. This, to the eye, certainly looks like a
definite shell, but some theorists have been so impressed with the
difficulty of conceiving that a gaseous body like the Sun could, under the
conditions of such stupendous temperatures as there exist, have any
defined limit at all, that they deny that what we see on the Sun is a real
boundary, and argue that it only appears so to us through the effects of
the anomalous refraction or dispersion of light. Such theories introduce
difficulties greater and more numerous than those that they clear away,
and they are not generally accepted by practical observers of the Sun.
They seem incompatible with the apparent structure of the photosphere,
which is everywhere made up of a complicated mottling: minute grains
somewhat resembling those of rice in shape, of intense brightness, and
irregularly scattered. This mottling is sometimes coarsely, sometimes
finely textured; in some regions it is sharp and well defined, in others
misty or blurred, and in both cases they are often arranged in large
elaborate patterns, the figures of the pattern sometimes extending for a
hundred thousand miles or more in any direction. The rice-like grains or
granules of which these figures are built up, and the darker pores between
them, are, on the other hand, comparatively small, and do not, on the
average, exceed two to four hundred miles in diameter.

But the Sun shows us other objects of quite a different order in their
dimensions. Here and there the bright granules of the photosphere become
disturbed and torn apart, and broad areas are exposed which are relatively
dark. These are _sunspots_, and in the early stages of their development
they are usually arranged in groups which tend to be stretched out
parallel to the Sun's equator. A group of spots in its later stages of
development is more commonly reduced to a single round, well-defined, dark
spot. These groups, when near the edge of the Sun, are usually seen to be
accompanied by very bright markings, arranged in long irregular lines,
like the foam on an incoming tide. These markings are known as the
_faculae_, from their brightness. In the spectroscope, when the serrated
edges of the chromosphere are under observation, every now and then great
_prominences_, or tongues and clouds of flame, are seen to rise up from
them, sometimes changing their form and appearance so rapidly that the
motion can almost be followed by the eye. An interval of fifteen or
twenty minutes has frequently been sufficient to transform, quite beyond
recognition, a mass of flame fifty thousand miles in height. Sometimes a
prominence of these, or even greater, dimensions has formed, developed,
risen to a great distance from the Sun, and completely disappeared within
less than half an hour. The velocity of the gas streams in such eruptions
often exceeds one hundred miles a second; sometimes, though only rarely,
it reaches a speed twice as great.

Sunspots do not offer us examples of motions of this order of rapidity,
but the areas which they affect are not less astonishing. Many spot groups
have been seen to extend over a length of one hundred thousand, or one
hundred and fifty thousand miles, and to cover a total area of a thousand
million square miles. Indeed, the great group of February, 1905, at its
greatest extent, covered an area four times as great as this. Again, in
the normal course of the development of a spot group, the different
members of the group frequently show a kind of repulsion for each other in
the early stages of the group's history, and the usual speed with which
they move away from each other is three hundred miles an hour.

The spots, the faculae, the prominences, are all, in different ways, of
the nature of storms in an atmosphere; that is to say, that, in the great
gaseous bulk of the Sun, certain local differences of constitution,
temperature, and pressure are marked by these different phenomena. From
this point of view it is most significant that many spots are known to
last for more than a month; some have been known to endure for even half a
year. The nearest analogy which the Earth supplies to these disturbances
may be found in tropical cyclones, but these are relatively of far smaller
area, and only last a few days at the utmost, while a hundred miles an
hour is the greatest velocity they ever exhibit, and this, fortunately,
only under exceptional circumstances. For a wind of such violence mows
down buildings and trees as a scythe the blades of grass; and were
tornadoes moving at a rate of 300 miles an hour as common upon the Earth
as spots are upon the Sun, it would be stripped bare of plants and
animals, as well as of men and of all their works.

It is not an accident that the Sun, when storm-swept, shows this violence
of commotion, but a necessary consequence of its enormous temperature and
pressures. As we have seen, the force of gravity at its surface is 27·65
times that at the surface of the Earth, where a body falls 16·1 feet in
the first second of time; on the Sun, therefore, a body would fall 445
feet in the first second; and the atmospheric motions generally would be
accelerated in the same proportion.

The high temperatures, the great pressures, the violent commotions which
prevail on the Sun are, therefore, the direct consequence of its enormous
mass. The Sun is, then, not merely the type and example of the chief
source of light and heat in a given planetary system; it indicates to us
that size and mass are the primary tokens by which we may judge the
temperature of a world, and the activity to be expected in its changes.




CHAPTER IV

THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE ELEMENTS IN SPACE


It is now an old story, but still possessing its interest, how Fraunhofer
analysed the light of the Sun by making it pass through a narrow slit and
a prism, and found that the broad rainbow-tinted band of light so obtained
was interrupted by hundreds of narrow dark lines, images in negative of
the slit; and how Kirchhoff succeeded in proving that two of these dark
lines were caused by the white light of the solar photosphere having
suffered absorption at the Sun by passing through a stratum of glowing
sodium vapour. From that time forward it has been known that the Sun is
surrounded by an atmosphere of intensely heated gases, among which figure
many of those elements familiar to us in the solid form on the Earth, such
as iron, cobalt, nickel, copper, manganese, and the like. These metals,
here the very types of solid bodies, are permanent gases on the Sun.

The Sun, then, is in an essentially gaseous condition, enclosed by the
luminous shell which we term the photosphere. This shell Prof. C. A. Young
and the majority of astronomers regard as consisting of a relatively thin
layer of glowing clouds, justifying the quaint conceit of R. A. Proctor,
who spoke of the Sun as a "Bubble"; that is, a globe of gas surrounded by
an envelope so thin in comparison as to be a mere film. There has been
much difference of opinion as to the substance forming these clouds, but
the theory is still widely held which was first put forward by Dr.
Johnstone Stoney in 1867, that they are due to the condensation of carbon,
the most refractory of all known elements. Prof. Abbot, however, refuses
to believe in a surface of this nature, holding that the temperature of
the Sun is too high even at the surface to permit any such condensation.

The application of the spectroscope to astronomy is not confined to the
Sun, but reaches much further. The stars also yield their spectra, and we
are compelled to recognize that they also are suns; intensely heated
globes of glowing gas, rich in the same elements as those familiar to us
on the Earth and known by their spectral lines to be present on the Sun.
The stars, therefore, cannot themselves be inhabited worlds any more than
the Sun, and at a stroke the whole of the celestial luminaries within the
furthest range of our most powerful telescopes are removed from our
present search. Only those members of our solar system that shine by
reflecting the light of the Sun can be cool enough for habitation; the
true stars cannot be inhabited, for, whatever their quality and order,
they are all suns, and must necessarily be in far too highly heated a
condition to be the abode of life. Many of them may, perhaps, be a source
of light and heat to attendant planets, but there is no single instance in
which such a planet has been directly observed; no dark, non-luminous body
has ever been actually seen in attendance on a star. Many double or
multiple stars are known, but these are all instances in which one
sun-like body is revolving round another of the same order.[9] We see no
body shining by reflected light outside the limits of the solar system.
Planets to the various stars may exist in countless numbers, but they are
invisible to us, and we cannot discuss conditions where everything is
unknown. Enquiry in such a case is useless, and speculation vain.

The stars, as revealed to us by the spectroscope are all of the same order
as the Sun, but they are not all of the same species. Quite a large number
of stars, of which Arcturus is one of the best-known examples, show
spectra that are essentially the same as that of the Sun, but there are
other stars of which the spectra bear little or no semblance to it.
Nevertheless, it remains true that, on the whole, stellar spectra bear
witness to the presence of just the same elements as we recognize in the
Sun, though not always in the same proportions or in the same
conditions--hydrogen, calcium, sodium, magnesium, iron, titanium, and many
more are recognized in nearly all. It is true that not all the known
terrestrial elements have yet been identified in either Sun or stars; but,
in general, those missing are either "negative" elements like the
halogens, or elements of great atomic weight like mercury and platinum.
That elements of one class should, as a rule, reveal their presence in Sun
and stars wherever these are placed, and, correspondingly, that other
classes should as generally fail to show themselves, indicate that such
absence is more likely to be due to the general structure of the stellar
photospheres and reversing layers than to any irregularity in the
distribution of matter in the universe. It is easy, for example, to
conceive that the heavy metals may lie somewhat deeper down within the Sun
or star than those of low atomic weight. In the case of the Sun, there
seems a clear connection between atomic weight and the distinctness with
which the element is recognized in the spectrum of the photosphere, the
lower atomic weights showing themselves more conspicuously.

It is clear that not all elements present in a Sun or star show themselves
in its spectrum. Oxygen is very feebly represented by its elemental
lines, but the flutings of titanium oxide are found in sunspots, and with
great distinctness in a certain type of stars. Nitrogen, too, though not
directly recognized, proves its presence by the lines of cyanogen. The
case of helium is one of particular interest; this element was recognized
by a very bright yellow line in the solar prominences before it was known
to exist on the Earth; indeed, it received the name _helium_ because it
then seemed to be a purely solar constituent. Now it is seen as a strong
absorption line in the spectrum of many stars; but for some reason it is
not in general seen as an absorption line over the Sun's disc, and if our
Sun were removed to such distance so as to appear to us only as a star, we
should have no evidence that it contained any helium at all. So far, then,
as the evidence of the spectroscope goes, the elements present in the
Earth are present throughout the whole extent of the universe within our
view: the same elements and with the same qualities. For the lines of the
spectrum of an element are the revelation of its innermost molecular
structure, so that we can confidently affirm that hydrogen and oxygen on
Sirius, Arcturus, or the Sun, are essentially the same elements as
hydrogen and oxygen on the Earth. On a planet attached to any of these
stars, the two gases would combine together to form water under just the
same conditions as they do here on the Earth; and at suitable
temperatures that water would be a neutral liquid, capable of dissolving
just the same chemical substances that it does here. It would freeze as it
does here; it would evaporate as it does here; it would be water as
completely in all its qualities and conditions as earthly water is. And
what applies to one element or compound applies to all. Throughout the
whole extent of space, the same building materials have been employed, and
throughout they retain the same qualities.

Hydrogen is seen in the spectra of nearly all stars, and also in those of
nebulæ. The elemental lines of oxygen are not indeed seen in stellar
spectra, but that the element is present is shown by the flutings of
titanium oxide which distinguish stars like Antares. Nitrogen and carbon
again are not recognized by their elemental lines, but the lines of
cyanogen are seen in the spectra of comets and of sunspots, and
hydrocarbon flutings in the spectra of comets and red stars; while in a
few of the hottest stars even sulphur has recently been identified.[10]
All the five organo-genetic elements are therefore abundantly diffused
through space; the materials for protoplasm, "the albuminous substance
with water," are at hand everywhere. This being so, it is reasonable to
infer that if organic life exists elsewhere than on this Earth, its
essential feature, there as here, is the metabolism of nitrogenous carbon
compounds in association with protoplasm.

But it is objected that "we are not yet able to identify all the lines in
solar or stellar spectra; may not some of these lines be due to elements
of which we know nothing here, and may not such new elements form complex
and unstable compounds with each other, or with some of those familiar to
us, that would take the place of the five organo-generators, and so give
rise to a physical basis of life, different from that we know on this
Earth?"

But the development of Mendeléeff's Periodic Law has shown that the
elements are not to be regarded as disconnected entities. The Law as given
in Mendeléeff's own words, runs: "The properties of the elements as well
as the forms and properties of their compounds are in periodic dependence
on, or (expressing ourselves algebraically) form a periodic function of
the atomic weights of the elements." In other words, they form a series,
not only as it regards their atomic weights, but also as it regards their
own properties and the forms and properties of their compounds. We are no
longer at liberty, as we might have been many years ago, to call into
fancied existence new elements having no relation in their properties and
compounds to those with which we are acquainted. New elements, no doubt,
will be discovered in the future, as in the past; and indeed we may be
able to discover them and learn their atomic weights and properties
without ever being able to handle them in a terrestrial laboratory.

In a series of remarkable papers communicated to the Royal Astronomical
Society during the past year (1911-1912), Dr. J. W. Nicholson has given
the result of his computation of the positions of the spectral lines of
two elements of simple structure, and has found that the resulting lines
correspond, for one dynamical system, to the chief unidentified lines
observed in the spectra of nebulæ, and for the other, to the chief
unidentified lines in the spectrum of the corona. The latter element is
probably associated with the halogens, but of much lower atomic weight
(namely, 1·3), than fluorine; he therefore gives it the name of
_Protofluorine_. The other element, to which he gives the name _Nebulium_,
will have an atomic weight of 2·1. Prof. Max Wolf, of Heidelberg, has
recently pointed out[11] the evidence of the presence of two other unknown
gases in the Ring nebula in Lyra, and there is no reason to suppose that
the process of discovery has come to an end. But we cannot imagine that we
shall discover any new elements that are more abundant and more
universally diffused than the five which give us protoplasm--"the physical
basis of life." To take an analogy from the solar system: many hundreds of
planetoids have now been discovered between the orbits of Mars and
Jupiter, and probably many hundreds more remain to be discovered; but of
one thing we are certain, that none of the planetoids yet to be discovered
will be of the same rank as either of those two guardians, Mars and
Jupiter, who revolve on the confines of the planetoidal zone. Indeed,
Ceres, the planetoid first discovered, has a greater mass than the
aggregate of all discovered since, and probably of all that exist in the
zone.

Water is essential for life here, but the quality in water which restricts
the range of terrestrial life is that it freezes at 0° Centigrade, and
boils at 100° Centigrade; it is only in the liquid state during the
intermediate range of 100 degrees. In order to extend the range for living
organisms, we should have, therefore, to discover a new vehicle, that,
possessing all the other qualities of water, is not restricted to the
liquid state within the same limits. But we are at once met with the
difficulty that the first essential for the vehicle is that it should be
abundant, and there are no other elements more abundant than hydrogen and
oxygen. This new vehicle must, like water, be both neutral and stable, or
it would itself interfere with the highly unstable compounds that are a
necessity for metabolism. And, if we could find this new vehicle, liquid
at temperatures outside the 0° to 100° Centigrade, have we any reason to
suppose that protoplasm itself would be able to endure these outlying
temperatures? Looking through the range of substances available, we can
only say that none other presents itself as approaching water in
suitability for its essential office. If we, ourselves, were able to
create a vehicle, could we imagine one more perfectly suited?




CHAPTER V

THE MOON


The Sun and Moon offer to our sight almost exactly the same apparent
diameters; to the eye, they look the same size. But as we know the Sun to
be 400 times as distant as the Moon, it is necessarily 400 times as large;
its surface must exceed that of the Moon by the square of 400, or 160,000;
its volume by the cube of 400, or 64,000,000. As the Sun is of low mean
density, its mass does not exceed that of the Moon in quite the same high
ratio; but it is equal in mass to

  27,000,000 moons.

Compared with the Sun, the Moon is therefore an insignificant little
ball--a mere particle; but as a world for habitation it possesses some
advantages over the Sun. The first glance at it in a telescope is
sufficient to assure the observer that he is looking at a solid,
substantial globe. It is not only substantial, it is rugged; its surface
is broken up into mountains, hills, valleys, and plains; the mountains
stand out in sensible relief; it looks like a ball of solid silver boldly
embossed and chased.

So far all is to the good for the purpose of habitation. Wherever men
are, they must have a solid platform on which to stand; they must have a
stable terrene whereon their food may grow, and this the Moon could
supply. "The Earth's gloom of iron substance" is necessary for man here,
and the Moon appears to offer a like stability.

Another favourable condition is that we know that the Moon receives from
the Sun a sufficient supply of light and heat. Each square yard of its
surface receives, on the average, the same amount of light and heat that
would fall upon a square yard on the Earth that was presented towards the
Sun at the same inclination; and we know from our own experience that this
is sufficient for the maintenance of life.

And the Moon is near enough for us to subject her to a searching scrutiny.
Every part of the hemisphere turned toward us has been repeatedly
examined, measured, and photographed; to that extent our knowledge of its
topography is more complete than of the world on which we live. There are
no unexplored regions on our side of the Moon. The great photographs taken
in recent years at the observatories of Paris and of the University of
Chicago have shown thousands of "crater-pits," not more than a mile
across; and narrow lines on the Moon's surface have been detected with a
breadth less than one-tenth of this. An elevation on the Moon, if it rose
up abruptly from an open plain, would make its presence apparent by the
shadow which it would cast soon after sunrise or near sunset; in this way
an isolated building, if it were as large as the great pyramid of Ghizeh,
would also show itself, and all our great towns and cities would be
apparent as areas of indistinct mottling, though the details of the cities
would not be made out.

But if vegetation took the same forms on the Moon as on the Earth, and
passed through the same changes, we should have no difficulty in
perceiving the evidence of its presence. If we were transported to the
Moon and turned our eyes earthward, we should not need the assistance of
any telescope in order to detect terrestrial changes which would be
plainly connected with the seasonal changes of vegetation. The Earth would
present to us a disc four times the apparent diameter of the Moon, and on
that disc Canada would offer as great an area as the whole of the Moon
does to us. We could easily follow with the naked eye the change from the
glittering whiteness of the aspect of Canada when snow-covered in winter,
to the brown, green and gold which would succeed each other during the
brighter months of the year. And this type of change would alternate
between the northern and southern hemispheres, for the winter of Canada is
the summer of the Argentine, and conversely.

We ought, therefore, to have no difficulty in observing seasonal changes
on the Moon, if such take place. But nothing of the kind has ever been
remarked; no changes sufficiently pronounced for us to be sure of them are
ever witnessed. Here and there some slight mutations have been suspected,
nearly all accomplishing their cycle in the course of a lunar day; so that
it is difficult to separate them from changes purely apparent, brought
about by the change in the incidence of the illumination.

The difference in appearance of a given area on the Moon when viewed under
a low Sun and when the Sun is on the meridian is very striking. In the
first case everything is in the boldest relief; the shadows are long and
intensely black; the whole area under examination in the telescope seems
as if it might be handled. Under the high Sun, the contrasts are gone; the
scenery appears flat, many of the large conspicuous markings are only
recognized with difficulty. Thus the terse remark of Mädler, "The full
Moon knows no Maginus," has become a proverb amongst selenographers; yet
Maginus is a fine walled plain some eighty miles in diameter, and its
rampart attains a height in parts of 14,000 feet. Maginus lies near Tycho,
which has been well named "the lunar metropolis," for from it radiates the
principal system of bright streaks conspicuous on the full Moon. These
white streaks appear when the shadows have vanished or are growing short;
they are not seen under a low Sun.

The changes which appear to take place in the lunar formations owing to
the change in their illumination are much more striking and varied than
would be anticipated. But the question arises whether all the changes that
are associated with the progress of the lunar day can be ascribed to this
effect. Thus, Prof. W. H. Pickering writes concerning a well-known pair of
little craters of about nine miles in diameter, "known as Messier and
Messier A, situated side by side not far from the centre of the Mare
Fecunditatis. When the Sun rises first on them, the eastern one, A, is
triangular and larger than Messier, which latter is somewhat pear-shaped.
About three days after sunrise they both suddenly turn white, Messier
rapidly grows in size, soon surpasses A, and also becomes triangular in
shape. Six days after sunrise the craters are again nearly of the same
size, owing to the diminution of Messier. The shape of A has become
irregular, and differs in different lunations. At nine days after sunrise
the craters are exactly alike in size and shape, both now being
elliptical, with their major axes lying in a nearly N. and S. direction.
Just before sunset A is again the larger, being almost twice the size of
Messier."[12]

Some observers explain this cycle of changes as due merely to the peculiar
contour of the two objects, the change in the lighting during the lunar
day altering their apparent figures. Prof. W. H. Pickering, on the other
hand, while recognizing that some portion of the change of shape is
probably due to the contour of the ground, conceives that, in order to
explain the whole phenomenon, it is necessary to suppose that a white
layer of hoar frost is formed periodically round the two craters. It is
also alleged that whereas Mädler described the two craters as being
exactly alike eighty years ago, Messier A is now distinctly the larger;
but it is very doubtful whether Mädler's description can be trusted to
this degree of nicety. If it could, this would establish a permanent
change in the actual structure of the lunar surface at this point.

There are several other cases of the same order of ambiguity. The most
celebrated is Linné, a white spot about six miles in diameter on the Mare
Serentatis. This object appears to change in size during the progress of
the lunar day, and, as with Messier, some selenographers consider that it
has also suffered an actual permanent change in shape within the last
sixty or seventy years. Here again the evidence is not decisive; Neison is
by no means convinced that a change has taken place, yet does not think it
impossible that Linné may once have been a crater with steep walls which
have collapsed into its interior through the force of gravity.

Another type of suspected change is associated with the neighbourhood of
Aristarchus, the brightest formation on the Moon, so bright indeed that
Sir William Herschel, observing it when illuminated by earthshine in the
dark portion of the Moon, thought that he was watching a lunar volcano in
eruption. In 1897, on September 21, the late Major Molesworth noticed that
the crater was at that time under the rays of the setting Sun, and filled
with shadow, and the inner terraces, which should have been invisible,
were seen as faint, knotted, glimmering streaks under both the eastern and
western walls, and the central peak was also dimly discernible. He thought
this unusual lighting up of rocks on which the Sun had already set might
be due either to phosphorescence produced by long exposure to the Sun's
rays, or to inherent heat, or to reflected glare from the western rampart.
Still more important, both Major Molesworth and Mr. Walter Goodacre, each
on more than one occasion, observed what seemed to be a faint bluish mist
on the inner slope of the east wall, soon after sunrise, but this was
visible only for a short time. Other selenographers too, on rare
occasions, have made observations accordant with these, relating to
various regions on the Moon.

These, and a few other similar instances, are all that selenography has to
offer by way of evidence of actual lunar change. Of seeming change there
is abundance, but beyond that we have only cases for controversy, and one
of the most industrious of the present-day observers of the Moon, M.
Philip Fauth, declares that "as a student of the Moon for the last twenty
years, and as probably one of the few living investigators who have kept
in practical touch with the results of selenography, he is bound to
express his conviction that no eye has ever seen a physical change in the
plastic features of the Moon's surface."[13]

In this matter of change, then, the Earth and Moon stand in the greatest
contrast to each other. As we have seen, from the view-point of the Moon,
the appearance of the Earth would change so manifestly with the progress
of the seasons that no one could fail to remark the difference, even
though observing with the naked eye. But from the view-point of the Earth,
the Moon when examined by our most experienced observers, armed with our
most powerful telescopes, offers us only a few doubtful enigmatical
instances of possible change confined to small isolated localities; we see
no evidence that the "gloom of iron substance" below is ever concealed by
a veil of changing vegetation, or that "between the burning light and deep
vacuity" of the heavens above, the veil of the flying vapour has ever been
spread out. We see the Moon so clearly that we are assured it holds no
water to nourish plant life; we see it so clearly because there is no air
to carry the vapour that might dim our view.

Life is change, and a planet where there is no change, or where that
change is very small, can be no home for life. The "stability and
insensibility" are indeed required in the platform upon which life is to
appear, but there must be the presence of "the passion and the perishing,"
or life will be unable to find a home.

We infer the absence of water and air from the Moon not only from the
unchanging character of its features and the distinctness with which we
see them; we are able to make direct observations. Galileo, the first man
to observe the Moon to better advantage than with the naked eye, was not
long before he decided that the Moon contained no water, for though
Milton, in a well-known passage, makes Galileo discover

  "Rivers or mountains on her spotty globe,"

Galileo himself wrote: "I do not believe that the body of the Moon is
composed of earth and water." The name of _maria_ was given to the great
grey plains of the Moon by Hevelius, but this was simply for convenience
of nomenclature, not because he actually believed them to be seas. One
observation is, in itself, sufficient to prove that the maria are not
water surfaces. The Moon's "terminator," that is to say, the line dividing
the part in sunlight from that in darkness, is clearly irregular when it
passes over the great plains; were they actually sea it would be a bright
line and perfectly smooth. The grey plains are therefore not expanses of
water now, nor were they in time past. It is obvious that in some remote
antiquity their surface was in a fluid condition, but it was the fluidity
of molten rock. This is seen by the way in which the maria have invaded,
breached, broken down, and submerged many of the circular formations on
their margins. Thus the Mare Humorum has swept away half the wall of the
rings, Hippalus and Doppelmayer, and far out in the open plain of the Mare
Nubium, great circles like Kies, and that immediately north of Flamsteed,
stand up in faint relief as of half-submerged rings. Clearly there was a
period after the age in which the great ring mountains and walled plains
came into existence, when an invasive flood attacked and partially
destroyed a large proportion of them. And the flood itself evidently
became more viscous and less fluid the further it spread from its original
centre of action, for the ridges and crumpling of the surface indicate
that the material found more and more difficulty in its flow.

We have evidence just as direct that there is no atmosphere. This is very
strikingly shown when the Moon, in its monthly progress among the stars,
passes before one of them and occults it. Such an occultation is
instantaneous, and is particularly impressive when either a disappearance
or a reappearance occurs at the defective limb; that is to say, at the
limb which is not illuminated by the Sun, and is therefore invisible. The
observer may have a bright star in the field of view, showing steadily in
a cloudless sky; there is not a hint of a weakening in its light; suddenly
it is gone. The first experience of such an observation is most
disconcerting; it is hardly less disconcerting to observe the reappearance
at the dark limb. One moment the field of view of the telescope is empty;
the next, without any sort of dawning, a bright star is shining steadily
in the void, and it almost seems to the observer as if an explosion had
taken place. If the Moon had an atmosphere extending upwards from its
surface in all directions and of any appreciable density, an occultation
would not be so exceedingly abrupt; and, in particular, if the occultation
were watched through a spectroscope, then, at the disappearance, the
spectrum of the star would not vanish as a whole, but the red end would go
first, and the rest of the spectrum would be swept out of sight
successively, from orange to the violet. This does not happen; the whole
spectrum goes out together, and it is clear that no appreciable atmosphere
can exist on the Moon. In actual observation so inappreciable is it that
its density at the Moon's surface is variously estimated as 1/300th of
that of the Earth by Neison, and as 1/10000th by W. H. Pickering. If the
Moon possessed an atmosphere bearing the same proportion to her total mass
as we find in the case of the Earth, she would have a density of
one-fortieth of our atmosphere at the sea level.

The Moon is at the same mean distance from the Sun as the Earth, and
therefore, surface for surface, receives from it on the average the same
amount of light and heat. But it makes a very different use of these
supplies. Bright as the Moon appears when seen at the full on some winter
night, it has really but a very low power of reflection, and is only
bright by contrast with the darkness of the midnight sky. If the full Moon
is seen in broad daylight, it is pale and ghost-like. Sir John Herschel
has put it on record that when in South Africa he often had the
opportunity of comparing the Moon with the face of Table Mountain, the Sun
shining full upon both, and the Moon appeared no brighter than the
weathered rock. The best determinations of the _albedo_ of the Moon, that
is to say, of its reflective power, give it as 0·17, so that only
one-sixth of the incident light is reflected, the other five-sixths being
absorbed. It is difficult to obtain a good determination of the Earth's
_albedo_, but the most probable estimate puts it as about 0·50, or three
times as great as that of the Moon. This high reflective power is partly
to be accounted for by the great extent of the terrestrial polar caps, but
chiefly by the clouds and dust layer always present in its atmosphere.

A larger proportion, therefore, of the solar rays are employed in heating
the soil of the Moon than in heating that of the Earth, and in this
connection the effect of an important difference between the two worlds
must be noted. The Earth rotates on its axis in 23 hours 56 minutes 4
seconds, the mean length of its rotation as referred to the Sun being 24
hours. The rotation of the Moon, on the other hand, takes 27 days 7 hours
43 minutes to accomplish, giving a mean rotation, as referred to the Sun,
of 29 days 12 hours 44 minutes. The lunar surface is therefore exposed
uninterruptedly to the solar scorching for very nearly fifteen of our days
at a time, and it is, in turn, exposed to the intense cold of outer space
for an equal period. As the surface absorbs heat so readily, it must
radiate it as quickly; hence radiation must go on with great rapidity
during the long lunar night. Lord Rosse and Prof. Very have both obtained
measures of the change in the lunar heat radiation during the progress of
a total eclipse of the Moon, with the result that the heat disappeared
almost completely, though not quite at the same time as the light. Prof.
Langley succeeded in obtaining from the Moon, far down in the long wave
lengths of the infra-red, a heat spectrum which was only partly due to
reflection from the Sun; part coming from the lunar soil itself, which,
having absorbed heat from the Sun, radiated it out again almost
immediately. In 1898, Prof. Very, following up Langley's line of work,
concluded that the temperature of the lunar soil must range through about
350° Centigrade, considerably exceeding 100° at the height of the lunar
day, and falling to about the temperature of liquid air during the lunar
night. So wide a range of temperature must be fatal to living organisms,
particularly when the range is repeated at short, regular intervals of
time. But this range of temperature comes directly from the length of the
Moon's rotation period; for the longer the day of the Moon, the higher the
temperature which may be attained in it; the longer the night, the greater
the cold which will in turn be experienced. We learn, therefore, that the
time of rotation of a planet is an important factor in its habitability.




CHAPTER VI

THE CANALS OF MARS


Both of the two worlds best placed for our study are thus, for different
reasons, ruled out of court as worlds for habitation. The Sun by its
vastness, its intolerable heat and the violence of its changes, has to be
rejected on the one hand, while the Moon, so small, and therefore so
rigid, unchanging and bare, is rejected on the other.

Of the other heavenly bodies, the planet Mars is the one that we see to
best advantage. Two other planets, Eros and Venus, at times come nearer to
us, but neither offers us on such occasions equal facilities for their
examination. But of Mars it has been asserted not only that it is
inhabited, but that we know it to be the case, since the evidence of the
handiwork of intelligent beings is manifest to us, even across the
tremendous gulf of forty or more million miles of space.

A claim so remarkable almost captures the position by its audacity. There
is a natural desire among men to believe the marvellous, and the very
boldness of the assertion goes no small way to overcome incredulity. And
when we consider how puny are men as we see them on this our planet, how
minute their greatest works, how superhuman any undertaking would be which
could demonstrate our existence to observers on another planet, we must
admit that it is a marvel that there should be any evidence forthcoming
that could bear one way or another on the solution of a problem so
difficult.

The first fact that we have to remember with regard to the planet Mars is
the smallness of its apparent size. To the eye it is nearly a star--a
point of light without visible surface. It is almost twice the size of the
Moon in actual diameter, but as its mean distance from the Earth is 600
times that of the Moon, its mean apparent diameter is 300 times smaller.
We cannot, however, watch Mars in all parts of its orbit; it is best
placed for observation, and, therefore, most observed, when in opposition,
and oppositions may be favourable or unfavourable. At the most favourable
opposition, Mars is 140 times as distant as the Moon; at the least
favourable, 260 times; so that on such occasions its apparent size varies
from 1/70th of the diameter of the Moon to 1/130th. But a telescope with a
magnifying power of 70 could never, under the most perfect conditions,
show Mars, even in the closest opposition, as well as the Moon is seen
with the naked eye, for the practical magnifying power of a telescope is
never as great as the theoretical. In practice, a child's spy-glass
magnifying some six diameters will show the full Moon to better advantage
than Mars has ever been seen, even in our most powerful telescopes.

The small apparent size of the planet explains how it was that Galileo
does not seem to have been able to detect any markings upon it. In 1659,
Huyghens laid the foundation stone of areography by observing some dark
spots, and determining from their apparent movements that the planet had a
rotation on its axis, which it accomplished in about the same time as the
Earth. Small and rough as are the drawings that Huyghens made, the
identification of one or two of his spots is unmistakable. Seven years
later, in 1666, both Cassini and Hooke made a number of sketches, and
those by Hooke have been repeatedly used in modern determinations of the
rotation period of the planet. The next great advance was made by Sir
William Herschel, who, during the oppositions of 1777, 1779, 1781, and
1783, determined the inclination of the axis of Mars to the plane of its
orbit, measured its polar and equatorial diameters, and ascertained the
amount of the polar flattening. He paid also special attention to two
bright white spots upon the planet, and he showed that these formed round
the planet's poles and increased in size as the winter of each several
hemisphere drew on and diminished again with the advance of summer,
behaving therefore as do the snow caps of our own polar regions.

The next stage in the development of our knowledge of Mars must be
ascribed to the two German astronomers, Beer and Mädler, who made a series
of drawings in the years 1830, 1832 and 1837, by means of a telescope of 4
inches aperture, from which they were able to construct a chart of the
entire globe. This chart may be considered classic, for the features which
it represents have been observed afresh at each succeeding opposition.
Mars, therefore, possesses a permanent topography, and some of the
markings in question can be identified, not only in the rough sketches
made by Sir William Herschel, but even in those made by Hooke and Cassini
as far back as the year 1666. In the forty years that followed, the planet
was studied by many of the most skilled observers, particularly by Mr. J.
N. Lockyer in 1862, and the Rev. W. R. Dawes in 1864. In 1877, the late
Mr. N. E. Green, drawing-master to Queen Victoria, and a distinguished
painter in water colours, made a series of sketches of the planet from a
station in the island of Madeira 2000 feet above sea-level. When the
opposition was over, Mr. Green collected together a large number of
drawings, and formed a chart of the planet, much richer in detail than any
that had preceded it, and from his skill, experience and training as an
artist he reproduced the appearance of the planet with a fidelity that had
never been equalled before and has never been surpassed since. At this
time it was generally assumed that Mars was a miniature of our own world.
The brighter districts of its surface were supposed to be continents, the
darker, seas. As Sir William Herschel had already pointed out long before,
the little world evidently had its seasons, its axis being inclined to the
plane of its orbit at much the same angle as is the case with the Earth;
it had its polar caps, presumably of ice and snow; its day was but very
little longer than that of the Earth; and the only important difference
seemed to be that it had a longer year, and was a little further off the
Sun. But the general conclusion was that it was so like the Earth in its
conditions that we had practically found out all that there was to know;
all that seemed to be reserved for future research was that a few minor
details of the surface might be filled in as the power of our telescopes
was increased.

But fortunately for progress, this sense of satisfaction was to be rudely
disturbed. As Mars, in its progress round the Sun, receded from the Earth,
or rather as the Earth moved away from it, the astronomers who observed so
diligently during the autumn of 1877 turned their attention to other
objects. One of them, however, Schiaparelli, the most distinguished
astronomer on the continent of Europe, still continued to watch the
planet, and, as the result of his labours, he published some months later
the first of a magnificent series of _Memoirs_, bringing to light what
appeared to be a new feature. His drawings not only showed the "lands" and
"seas," that is to say the bright and dark areas, that Green and his
predecessors had drawn, but also a number of fine, narrow, dark lines
crossing the "lands" in every direction. These narrow lines are the
markings which have since been so celebrated as the "canals of Mars," and
the discussion as to the real nature of these canals has focussed
attention upon Mars in a way that, perhaps, nothing else could have done.
Before 1877 the study of planetary markings was left almost entirely to
the desultory labours of amateurs, skilled though many of them were; since
1877, the most powerful telescopes of the great public observatories of
the world have been turned upon Mars, and the most skilful and experienced
of professional astronomers have not been ashamed to devote their time to
it.

There is no need to pass in review the whole of the immense mass of
observations that have been accumulated since Schiaparelli brought out the
first of his great Memoirs. That Memoir gave rise to an immediate
controversy, for many astronomers of skill and experience had observed the
planet in 1877 without detecting the network of lines which Schiaparelli
had revealed, and it was natural that they should feel some reluctance in
accepting results so strange and novel. But little by little this
controversy has passed. We now know that the "canals" vary much in their
visibility, and "curiously enough the canals are most conspicuous, not at
the time the planet is nearest to the Earth and its general features are
in consequence best seen, but as the planet goes away the canals come out.
The fact is that the orbital position and the seasonal epoch conspire to a
masking of the phenomena." This was the chief reason why Schiaparelli's
discoveries seemed at first to stand so entirely without corroboration;
the "canals" did not become conspicuous until after most observers had
desisted from following the planet. Another reason was that, in 1877, Mars
was low down in the sky for northern observatories, and good definition is
an essential for their recognition. But the careful examination of
drawings made in earlier oppositions, especially those made by Dawes and
Green, afforded confirmation of not a few of Schiaparelli's "canals"; even
in 1877 a few of the easiest and most conspicuous had been delineated by
other astronomers before any rumour of Schiaparelli's work had come
abroad, and as Mars came under observation again and again at successive
oppositions, the number of those who were able to verify Schiaparelli's
discoveries increased. It has now long been known that the great Italian
astronomer was not the victim of a mere optical illusion; there were
actual markings on the planet Mars where he had represented them; markings
which, when seen under like conditions and with equal instrumental
equipment, did present the appearance of straight, narrow lines. The
"canals of Mars" are not mere figments of the imagination, but have a real
objective basis.

As this controversy has passed away, another and a very different one has
arisen out of an unfortunate mistranslation of the term chosen by
Schiaparelli to indicate these linear streaks. In conformity with the type
of nomenclature adopted by previous areographers who had divided Mars into
"seas," "continents," "islands," "isthmuses," "straits" and the like,
Schiaparelli had called the narrow lines he detected "_canali_", that is
to say "channels," but without intending to convey the idea of artificial
construction. Indeed, he himself was careful to point out that these
designations "were not intended to prejudge the nature of the spot, and
were nothing but an artifice for helping the memory and for shortening
descriptions." And he added, "We speak in the same way of the lunar seas,
although we well know that there are no true seas on the Moon." But
"_canali_" was unhappily rendered in English as "canals," instead of
"channels." "Channel" would have left the nature of the marking an open
question, but, in English, "canal" means an artificial waterway. Here then
the question as to whether or no Mars is inhabited comes definitely before
us. Have we sufficient grounds for believing that the "canals" are
artificial constructions, or may they be merely natural formations?

In 1894, Mr. Percival Lowell founded at Flagstaff, Arizona, U.S.A., a
well-equipped observatory for the special study of Mars, and he has
continued his scrutiny of the planet from that time to the present with
the most unrelaxing perseverance. The chief results that he has obtained
have been the detection of many new "canals"; the discovery of a number of
dark, round dots, termed by him "oases," at the junctions of the "canals";
and the demonstration that the "canals" and certain of the dusky regions
are subject to strictly seasonal change, as really as the polar caps
themselves. In addition, he has formed the conclusion, which he has
supported with much ingenuity and skill, that the regularity of the
"canals" and "oases" quite precludes the possibility of their being
natural formations. Hence there has arisen the second controversy: that on
the nature of the "canals"; for Mr. Lowell considers that their presence
proves the existence of inhabitants on Mars, who, by means of a Titanic
system of irrigation, are fighting a losing battle against the gradual
desiccation of their planet.

In a paper published in the _International Scientific Review_, "Scientia,"
in January, 1910, Mr. Lowell gave a summary of his argument.

    "Organic life needs water for its existence. This water we see exists
    on Mars, but in very scant amount, so that if life of any sort exists
    there, it must be chiefly dependent on the semi-annual unlocking of
    the polar snows for its supply, inasmuch as there are no surface
    bodies of it over the rest of the planet. Now the last few years,
    beginning with Schiaparelli in 1877, and much extended since at
    Flagstaff, have shown:

    "The surface of the planet to be very curiously meshed by a fine
    network of lines and spots.

    "Now if one considers first the appearance of this network of lines
    and spots, and then its regular behaviour, he will note that its
    geometrism precludes its causation on such a scale by any natural
    process and, on the other hand, that such is precisely the aspect
    which an artificial irrigating system, dependent upon the melting of
    the polar snows, would assume. Since water is only to be had at the
    time it is there unlocked, and since for any organic life it must be
    got, it would be by tapping the disintegrated cap, and only so, that
    it could be obtained. If Mars be inhabited, therefore, it is precisely
    such a curious system we should expect to see, and only by such
    explanation does it seem possible to account for the facts.

    "These lines are the so-called canals of Mars. It is not supposed that
    what we see is the conduit itself. On the contrary, the behaviour of
    these lines indicates that what we are looking at is vegetation. Now,
    vegetation can only be induced by a water-supply. What we see
    resembles the yearly inundation of the Nile, of which to a spectator
    in space the river itself might be too narrow to be seen, and only the
    verdured country on its banks be visible. This is what we suppose to
    be the case with Mars. However the water be conducted, whether in
    covered conduits, which seems probable, or not, science is not able to
    state, but the effects of it are so palpable and so exactly in accord
    with what such a system of irrigation would show, that we are
    compelled to believe that such is indeed its _vera causa_."

Beside the bulky _Memoirs_ in which Prof. Lowell has published the
scientific results obtained at his observatory at Flagstaff, and papers
and articles appearing in various scientific journals, he has brought out
three books of a more popular character: "_Mars_"; "_Mars and its
Canals_"; and "_Mars as the Abode of Life_." In these he shows that to the
assiduity of the astronomer he adds the missionary's zeal and eagerness
for converts as he pleads most skilfully for the acceptance of his chosen
doctrine of the presence of men on Mars. In the last of the three books
mentioned, he deals directly with "Proofs of Life on Mars." The presence
of vegetation may be inferred from seasonal changes of tint, just as an
observer on the Moon might with the naked eye watch effects on the Earth.
But though "vegetable life could thus reveal itself directly, animal life
could not. Not by its body but by its mind would it be known. Across the
gulf of space it could be recognized only by the imprint it had made on
the face of Mars."

    "Confronting the observer are lines and spots that but impress him the
    more, as his study goes on, with their non-natural look. So uncommonly
    regular are they, and on such a scale as to raise suspicions whether
    they can be by nature regularly produced" (p. 188).

    "... Unnatural regularity, the observations showed, betrays itself in
    everything to do with the lines: in their surprising straightness,
    their amazing uniformity throughout, their exceeding tenuity, and
    their immense length" (p. 189).

    "As a planet ages, its surface water grows scarce. Its oceans in time
    dry up, its rivers cease to flow, its lakes evaporate (p. 203)....
    Now, in the struggle for existence, water must be got.... Its
    procuring depends on the intelligence of the organisms that stand in
    need of it.... As a planet ages, any organisms upon it will share in
    its development. They must evolve with it, indeed, or perish. At first
    they change only, as environment offers opportunity, in a lowly,
    unconscious way. But, as brain develops, they rise superior to such
    occasioning.... The last stage in the expression of life upon a
    planet's surface must be that just antecedent to its dying of
    thirst.... With an intelligent population this inevitable end would be
    long foreseen.... Both polar caps would be pressed into service in
    order to utilize the whole available supply and also to accommodate
    most easily the inhabitants of each hemisphere" (pp. 204-11).

    "That intelligence should thus mutely communicate its existence to us
    across the far reaches of space, itself remaining hid, appeals to all
    that is highest and most far-reaching in man himself. More
    satisfactory than strange this; for in no other way could the
    habitation of the planet have been revealed. It simply shows again the
    supremacy of mind.... Thus, not only do the observations we have
    scanned lead us to the conclusion that Mars at this moment is
    inhabited, but they land us at the further one that these denizens are
    of an order whose acquaintance was worth the making" (p. 215).

For the moment, let us leave Prof. Lowell's argument as he puts it.
Whether we accept it or not, it remains that it is a marvellous
achievement of the optician's skill and the observer's devotion that from
a planet so small and so distant as Mars any evidence should be
forthcoming at all that could bear upon the question of the existence of
intelligent organisms upon its surface. But it is of the utmost
significance to note that the whole question turns upon the presence of
water--of water in the liquid state, of water in a sufficient quantity;
and the final decision, for Mr. Lowell's contention, or against it, must
turn on that one point. The search for Life on Mars is essentially a
search for Water; a search for water, not only in the present state of
Mars, but in its past as well. For, without water in sufficient quantities
in the past, life on Mars could not have passed through the evolutionary
development necessary to its attaining its highest expression,--that where
the material living organism has become the tabernacle and instrument of
the conscious intelligent spirit.
